SPEECH OF SHRI T.T. KRISHNAMACHARI MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1957-58 (FINAL)
Sir,
In March last I presented to the predecessor of this House an interim budget for
the year 1957-58 in order to obtain a vote on account to meet Government’s expenditure
until the new Parliament assembled. The expenditure estimates I am presenting today
are more or less the same as the ones I presented in March. They have, however, been
reclassified in terms of the reorganised Ministries, and there are a few new items to
which I shall refer in the course of my speech.
2.
A White Paper reviewing the major economic developments in the economy
during 1956 and outlining the perspective against which policies for the current year
have to be formulated was circulated along with the Budget papers in March last.
Copies of that White Paper are being made available to Hon. Members. The broad
analysis of economic trends given in the White Paper needs little modification in the
light of subsequent data. I shall, however, review briefly the latest available economic
indicators and attempt an assessment of emergent and prospective trends.
3.
Before I do so, I would say that the economic classification of the budget
as it is now being presented will be issued in 2 or 3 days’ time. We attempted this
reclassification for the first time in March last, and we propose to continue the practice.
But, the document will have to be released after the short time-interval needed for
working into the tables the proposals I am now placing before the House today.
PRICES
4.
The White Paper of March last gave an analysis of the factors responsible
for the upward pressure on prices during 1956. In recent months the index of wholesale
prices has remained stable around 420. For the week ending April 27, it was 423.5,
which is a rise of 8.5 per cent over the level a year ago. Rice prices are now at633 and
wheat prices at 581; they are 14.1 per cent and 16.4 per cent respectively above the
level that obtained a year ago. Prices of industrial raw materials have risen by 9 per
cent during the year, of semi- manufactures by 5.3 per cent and of manufactures by
2.4 per cent. The rising price trend is due in part to the insufficiency of food production
in relation to the demand, and in part it is attributable to certain external factors. There
are, however, clear signs of demands in the economy tending to outstrip the supplies
available. If unchecked, these trends cannot but get reflected in further increases in
the cost of living and in the cost structure of industries.
1

PRODUCTION
5.
The latest available estimates of agricultural Production indicate that the
fall in production in 1955-56 was somewhat smaller than had been estimated earlier.
The output of rice is now estimated at 26.8 million tons, as compared to the earlier
estimate of 25.5 million tons and the estimate for the total foodgrains output for the
year has now been revised upwards from 63.4 million tons to 64.8 million tons. Even
so, the year shows a shortfall of some 4 million tons as compared to 1953-54 and
some 2 million tons as compared to 1954-55. The decline in foodgrains output in
1955-56 was mainly in respect of coarse grains, while the output of rice was higher
and that of wheat only slightly lower than in the previous year.
6.
The output of commercial crops shows no significant change relatively to
the estimates given in the White Paper issued in March. The over all index of agricultural
production, taking food crops and commercial crops together, would still show a fall
of about 2 per cent in 1955-56 as compared to 1954-55.
7.
The estimates of the likely level of agricultural production in 1956-57
indicate that the out turn should, on the whole, be somewhat better than the previous
years. The production of rice is expected to be around 28 millions tons, that is, about
1.2 million tons better em in 1955-56, and of wheat about 8.6 million tons as compared
to 8.3 million tons in 1955-56. The output of coarse grains and pulses is estimated at
about the same level as in 1955-56. Among commercial crops, latest reports indicate
that the production of cotton has increased by 20 per cent, groundnut by 6 per cent
and sugarcane by about 17 per cent. Nevertheless, reports on the food situation in
recent weeks indicate difficult conditions in some of the States. I would not like to
minimise the gravity of the situation as it obtains in these pockets. But statistically, it
does seem that if at all there is an overall shortage, it is of a marginal character. With
the arrangements that have been made for the import of foodgrains from abroad to
meet our normal needs and with the availability of additional supplies under the P.L.
480 agreement, it should be possible to ensure adequate supplies to enable us to hold
the price line. I would however concede that the situation will need, careful watching
and the apparatus necessary to deal with the situation as it develops from time to time
would have to be kept in readiness.
8.
Industrial production has continued to rise at an annual rate of about 8
per cent, the newer industries, both in the capital goods and in the consumer goods
sector advancing more rapidly than the older industries. The pace at which industrial
development has been proceeding is encouraging. In that process, it generates heavy
demands on our foreign exchange resources for import of capital goods as well as
raw materials. The immediate difficulties in respect of foreign exchange
notwithstanding, it would be reasonable to hope that the rate, of progress in the
industrial sector will be maintained.
2

9.
The overall position that emerges from the review of production trends so
far is that the supply of domestic goods and services has, on the whole, shown only a
modest improvement over the previous year and that the rise in prices during the year
reflects the pressure of a shortage in supplies relatively to the strength of the
expansionary factors in the economy generated by the rising levels of both public and
private investment.
MONETARY FACTORS
10. Considered by itself, the increase in money supply over the last 12 months
or so is not very large. Between the 13th April, 1956, and the 12th April this year, it
increased by about Rs.132 crores. This increase, it must however be remembered,
occurred in spite of the large balance of payments deficit which resulted in a precipitous
fall in the Reserve Bank’s foreign exchange holdings. The increase in rupee securities
held by the Reserve Bank works out at Rs.273 crores over the past twelve months.
This is, clearly, an expansionary factor which reflects, in the main, the growing
borrowings of Government from the Reserve Bank; in part, it arises from the pressure
on commercial banks to replenish their resources by selling securities. Scheduled
bank lending to the private sector was up by Rs.147 crores during the year. The
liquidity of the banks has in the process been strained and money rates have hardened.
Stringency in the money market has continued. This stringency is a usual
accompaniment of a phase of economic boom when investment tends to outturn savings;
it is not an indication of an insufficiency of the monetary media. Ali abatement of
monetary stringency has at this stage to be sought not through a general increase in
the supply of credit but through measures to prevent an excessive diversion of credit
to less essential uses and through the creation of special institutions or facilities for
supplying selectively the type of credit needed for priority developments.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE
11. The major problem before the country is the large and continuing strain
on foreign exchange resources. Since the beginning of the fiscal year, 1956-57, there
has been a persistent pressure on the balance of payments resulting in a draft on the
country’s foreign exchange resources of about Rs.300 crores. Since, during this period,
a credit of Rs.60.7 crores was obtained from the International Monetary Fund, the fall
in the Reserve Bank’s holdings amounted to about Rs.240 crores.
12. The balance of payments for the first quarter of 1956-57 showed a current
account deficit of Rs.44.5 crores; the deficit widened to Rs.81.4 crores in the second
quarter. For the third quarter for which data are now available, there was a further
increase in the deficit which worked out at Rs.84.8 crores. Excluding ‘official donations’
which enter into the current account, the deficits for the three quarters were Rs.54.1
crores, Rs.89.9 crores and Rs.92.4 crores. Since January, 1957, further foreign exchange
resources of the order of Rs.86 crores have been used up. The foreign, assets of the
Reserve Bank now stand a little below Rs.500 crores. Despite the measures already
3

taken to restrict imports, there is no indication yet of an abatement in the rate of
drawals which averages Rs.5 to 6 crores a week. This embarrassing ‘lag’
notwithstanding the steps we have already taken and the further steps we shall take as
necessary will, it is believed, begin to produce their effect before long.
13. On a rough estimate, imports for the year, 1956-57 will aggregate to over
Rs.1000 crores, while exports will be around Rs.650 crores. The bulk of the additional
imports received during the year is for developmental purposes and should help
strengthen the economy in due course. It is, however, obvious that foreign exchange
expenditure has to be limited to the availability of resources, and the present imbalance
in the country’s external account rectified. The various corrective measures adopted
during the year were reviewed in the March White Paper; further action in the same
direction which is necessary will, as I have just said, be taken.
14. There is hardly any, cushion left in our foreign exchange reserves to permit,
a further significant draft on them. The level of imports hereafter has necessarily to be
regulated in the light of our current earnings and the inflow of supplemental resources
we can secure from abroad and should be closely related to essential requirements of
the high priority projects in the Plan. The import policy for the second half of 195758 is being formulated with the objective of scouring a further sizeable saving on
imports. The large volume of imports of capital goods and of developmental
commodities that has already come in should make it possible for investment within
the economy to go forward for a time at a satisfactory rate and care will be taken to
allow such imports as are necessary for getting the benefit of whatever equipment has
been obtained and for maintaining production at a reasonable level. It would, however,
be idle to pretend that all hardship can be avoided. The exigencies of the situation
require that a balance on external account must be restored as early as possible, and
the necessary price has to be paid.
15. An improvement in the balance of payments situation is, I should add,
largely conditional upon the adoption of domestic policies designed to hold inflationary
pressures in check. An excess of purchasing power within the economy raises internal
prices; it also reduces the availability of supplies for export and pushes up the demand
for imports. It is, therefore, necessary to orient fiscal and monetary policies to the
keeping down of domestic consumption and to the diversion of a part of the domestic
output to export markets. I may mention in this connection that the exports of cotton
textiles in the first three months of 1957 have reached a total of 260 million yards,
which gives an annual rate of over 1,000 million yards. The increase in excise duty on
cloth in September last has it seems succeeded in one of its objectives without raising
prices in the process. We should constantly be on the watch for similar opportunities
to enlarge our foreign exchange earnings.
16. After this broad review of the latest economic trends, I should now like to
give an account of the budget estimates for 1957-58.
4

17. In the estimates presented on the 19th March, 1957, revenue was taken at
Rs.636.22 crores and expenditure at Rs.66 3.09 crores, leaving a deficit, on revenue
account, of Rs.26.87 crores. As a result of certain modifications which have since
been found to be necessary, revenue deficit on the basis of existing taxation, to now
estimated to increase by Rs.6.25 crores. This is as a result of a reduction of Rs.1.25
crores in the net contribution of the Posts and Telegraphs Department to General
Revenues and an increase in expenditure of Rs.5 crores.
18. The reduction in the Posts and Telegraphs contribution is due to an
additional provision of Rs.1.25 crores for the Renewals Reserve Fund. Abroad
examination has revealed that the provision made in recent years for depreciation and
replacement of assets has been very inadequate and that at least 2.75 per cent of the
capital at charge should be provided as a depreciation reserve. Provision made this
year amounts to Rs.1.25 crores which represents only 1.25 per cent on the capital at
charge of about Rs.100 crores. Pending a detailed examination, the provision is now
being doubled for the current year.
19. The increase in expenditure is accounted for by three items. The first is a
provision of Rs.3.12 crores for grants to the Khadi and Village industries Commission
for development of Ambar Charkha. A programme for the introduction of 75,000
Ambar Charkhas was started last year. The results of this programme have been
reviewed recently and it has been decided to continue and expand it further daring
1957-58. For the present the expanded programme provides for the introduction of an
additional 90,000 Ambar Charkhas. The total cost of this programme, during the current
year, is, estimated at Rs.10.09 crores of which Rs.3.12 crores will be by way of grants
and the balance by way of loans to the Commission.
20. The second item is a grant of Rs.1.55 crores to the Government of Assam
towards the extra expenditure which they have had to incur recently for the maintenance
of law and order as a result of the disturbances in certain border areas. The State
Government have had to incur large expenditure on providing relief to the affected
population, borrowing police forces from other States and constructing roads and
bridges to facilitate, communications. This abnormal expenditure has caused a great
strain on the State’s resources and the Government of India have agreed to meet 50
per cent of the cost of relief measures and of roads and bridges and the entire
expenditure on the police borrowed from other States.
21. The last item to a provision of Rs.33 lakhs for incidental expenditure on
transport etc., in connection with the return of Lend-Lease silver to the Government
of U.S.A. During the last War, the U.S. Government leased 226 million fine ounces
of silver to the Government of India to be returned five years after the termination
of the emergency. The liability for the return of this silver was divided between
India and Pakistan, India’s share being approximately 172 million fine ounces. It
has now been agreed that the Government of India would make immediate
5

arrangement for the shipment of 50 million fine ounces of silver and that the balance
of 122 million fine ounces should be made available in the form of quaternary alloy
coins. The cost of shipment of fine silver would be borne by the Government of
India while the alloy silver would be delivered in India and the U.S. Government
would meet all cost of handling, transport and refining and also retain the metals
recovered in the refining process.
22. On the capital account, the estimates presented in March last provided for
an outgo of Rs.772.21 crores for capital expenditure and loans to State Governments
and others. As stated earlier, an addition of Rs.6.97 crores is now required for loans to
Khadi and Village industries Commission for the Ambar Charkha programme.
23. A provision of Rs.15 crores is being made for loans to the Refinance
Corporation which is proposed to be constituted shortly. The Agricultural Commodities
Agreement between the Government of India and U.S.A. under American Public Law
480 provided, among other things, that a sum of about Rs.26 crores would be reserved
for re-lending to private enterprise in India through established banking facilities. As
a result of subsequent discussions with the U.S.A. authorities, a scheme has been
evolved, for channelling these funds through a Refinance Corporation, which will
provide re-lending facilities against loans given by Indian Banks. The Corporation is
proposed to be constituted as a joint stock company under the Companies Act, 1956,
initially with an ordinary share capital of Rs.12.5 crores to be subscribed by the Reserve
Bank of India, the State Bank of India, the Life insurance Corporation of India and
about 14 from amongst the larger scheduled banks in India. It is anticipated that the
Corporation will require loans from the Government of India out of the earmarked
funds relating to the P.L.480 Agreement, to the extent of about Rs.15 crores during the
current financial year.
24. Another provision of Rs.50 lakhs is being made for investment in the
share capital of the Export Risk Insurance Corporation. The Corporation will be
registered under the Indian Companies Act as a Private Limited Company with an
authorised capital of Rs.2.5 crores and paid-up capital of Rs.50 lakhs. The maximum
risks which the Corporation should carry will be 10 times the subscribed capital and
the reserve built by it. In setting up the Corporation to introduce a scheme of export
risk insurance in India, the Government of India have been actuated by the desire to
place the Indian exporter on even terms with exporters of other countries, who are
aided by similar schemes in their countries.
25. These three items on Capital account will aggregate Rs.22.47 crores.
Against this Capital receipts are now expected to improve by Rs.25.83 crores. Of this
increase, Rs.9.56 crores represent the additional contribution to the Railway
Development Fund which has been announced in the Railway Budget presented on
the 14th May, 1957, and Rs.1.27 crores the additional contribution (inclusive of interest)
to the Post and Telegraphs Renewals Reserve Fund mentioned earlier. The balance of
6

Rs.15 crores is on account of assistance under the Agricultural Commodities Agreement
with the U.S.A. which is now estimated at Rs.65 crores against the credit of Rs.50
crores assumed earlier, the total foreign aid thus amounting to Rs.150 crores. In the
result, there will be a net receipt of Rs.3.36 crores on Capital account.
26. Taking the Revenue and Capital accounts together, the over-all
deficit of Rs.365 crores estimated earlier will now increase by Rs.2.89 crores to
Rs.367.89 crores.
ASSESSMENT IN BRIEF
27. The review of economic conditions and of the financial position as it
emerges for the budget year shows clearly that while more resources are required
for meeting the increasing demands of the investment programme, both public and
private, the economy is not generating the necessary savings. Budgetary deficits,
rapid expansion of Bank credit continued pressure on prices and a large balance of
payments deficit-all these taken together connote a deficiency of voluntary savings
relatively to the size of the investments being undertaken. Further, the emerging
pressures have to be judged in relation to the requirements over the entire Plan
period. Expenditure on the Plan has inevitably to be stepped up year by year, and
the strain on the country’s resources will grow in the period that must elapse before
the investments being made come to fruition. These demands on the economy can
be met successfully only by sustained effort at increasing productivity and mobilising
savings on a national scale. Simultaneously, it is essential that the pace of investment,
both in the public and private sectors is kept in reasonable relationship to the progress
made in enlarging domestic savings and securing an inflow of external finance
adequate to meet the foreign exchange requirements of the programmes in hand.
This is the setting against which the policies and proposals that I propose to place
before the House have to be judged.
CREDIT POLICY
28. The first item of policy I wish to consider is credit policy. I referred
earlier to the expansion of bank credit that has taken place over the last twelve months
and the consequent strain this has imposed on the liquidity of the banking system. In
the last few years the tempo of investment activity in the private sector has been
steadily rising, and more recently there is evidence of a marked quickening of this
tempo. This has entailed larger demands on the banking system by trade and industry.
The credit advanced by scheduled banks rose during the year 1956 by Rs.153 crores
to a record level of Rs.788 crores, and in the first four months of this year, it has risen
by another Rs.119 crores. The deposit resources of banks have not gone up to a
corresponding extent. As a result, there has been an acute stringency of funds in the
money market and an appreciable increase in the call money rate and the lending and
deposit rates of banks. Considering the over all trends in the economy, the remedy for
a situation of this nature is not an out-right increase in the supply of money and credit
7

to the extent of the demand but a cautious and orderly expansion to meet genuine
needs, accompanied by measures to prevent an excessive diversion of credit to less
essential uses.
29. Against this background the Reserve Bank has been pursuing a policy
designed to moderate the inflationary possibilities of a large credit increase through
general and selective credit restraint- without at the same time denying credit to essential
lines of activity. This policy of judicious restraint took the form of an increase in the
bank’s lending rates; the rate on advances under the bill market scheme was raised in
two stages in March and November, 1956 from 3 to 31/2 per cent and in February this
year by an enhancement of the stamp duty on usance bills which increased the effective
rate of borrowing by banks to 4 per cent. Simultaneously, the bank increased its rate
on advances against Government securities to 4 per cent in addition, as it appeared
that speculative trading, particularly in essential commodities in short supplies like
foodgrains, absorbed some portion of bank credit, the Reserve Bank issued directives
with a view to regulating advances against such commodities.
30. These measures have generally been effective. In the busy season now
coming to a close credit extended has been of a somewhat smaller order than in the
last busy season. The technique of selective control has had some effect on the level
of bank credit; it has restrained the rise in prices in the sectors to which it was directed
and has helped in channelling resources to more desirable outlets. It must be emphasised
that the Reserve Bank’s policy has not been one of mere restriction of overall credit;
in fact, it has been one of ensuring controlled expansion- a process which has been
helped in particular by the liberalisation of the bank’s credit facilities under the bill
market scheme and also through its open market policy. The expanded facilities under
bill market scheme could be availed of by banks on a larger scale by a greater accretion
to their deposit resources. Some progress has been achieved in this respect, but, I feel
that a greater effort on the part of the banks to attract resources especially by reaching
classes which have not yet developed the banking habit is called for.
31. In view of the increasing tempo of developmental activity programmes
for the current year and in the succeeding years, I am convinced that credit policy
should continue to be directed towards moderating the pressure of demand for funds
without at the same time hampering essential lines of productive activity. It is in this
context that the Reserve Bank has been continuously keeping its bank rate under
review. Earlier today, the bank announced an increase in the bank rate from 31/2 to 4
per cent. As the effective lending rate of the Reserve Bank to scheduled banks has
been 4 per cent for some months now and the markets have had sufficient time to
adjust themselves to this rate, this seems an opportune moment for rationalising the
lending rate structure of the Reserve Bank by raising the bank rate itself. There are
other considerations also which indicate the desirability of making this adjustment in
the bank rate at this stage. I am not unaware of the limitations of the bank rate as an
8

effective weapon in a developing economy. Nevertheless, an increase in the bank rate
should assist the Reserve Bank in its task of moderating the pressure of demand for
credit. While the Bank’s latest decision might appear to be only a formal recognition
of a de facto situation, it is an action in keeping with the analysis of the economic
situation I have presented today, to curb the inflationary potential in the economy. In
view of the increase in the bank rate, there is no longer the need to keep the stamp
duty on usance bills at existing, levels, and I am therefore reducing it with immediate
effect to 50 Naye Paise per Rs.1,000 for three months.
32. I may mention, once again, in this context, the steps we are taking to set
up a Refinance Corporation to cater to medium term needs of industry. This Corporation
will in time, I hope, fill a lacuna in our existing system of industrial financing. This is
an instance of the positive aspects of the policy of controlled expansion which I have
mentioned a little while ago.
INCENTIVES FOR SMALL SAVINGS
33. This brings me to my next point, which relates to small savings. In the
ultimate analysis, the limit to expansion in the economy is set by the availability of
savings, and in a country like ours where the banking habit is undeveloped, small
savings have a special role to fill. Taking the first Plan period as a whole, the progress
of the small savings movement has been encouraging. The target for the Second Plan
requires substantial stepping up of collections year by year and I am anxious to ensure
a sufficient incentive for the investor in small savings in all forms. The small savings
movement is to my mind more than a way of collecting money; it is a scheme for
spreading the habit of thrift and of encouraging participation by the common man in
the Plan effort. I wish to take this opportunity to appeal to every family whether in the
urban or in the rural areas to save more and make the small savings movement a
success.
34. While the campaign for small savings has to be intensified, I propose also
to increase the rate of interest on small savings investments with effect from the 1st of
June 1957. Briefly, I have decided to increase the rate of interest on Post Office
Savings Bank accounts by 1/2 per cent and to have a new series of 12 years certificates
to be called National Plan Savings Certificates in replacement of the present National
Savings Certificates and National Plan Certificates. The interest on Savings Bank
accounts will now be 21/2 per cent on balances upto Rs.10,000 and 2 per cent, on
balances in excess up to Rs.15,000 in the case of individuals and 2 per cent on balances
in the public accounts. There will be only two types of savings certificates hereafter:
(1) the National Plan Savings Certificate with a maturity of 12 years and (H) the
Treasury Savings Deposit, Certificate with a maturity of 10 years. The yield on both
these will be increased; for the former to 4.25 per cent compound interest, at the end
of 12 years and for the latter to 4 per cent at the end of 10 years. Both these
certificates will be tax-exempt. For people who hold these certificates for periods less
than 12 years the yield will be suitably adjusted. For example, Rs.100 invested in
9

National Plan Savings Certificate will become Rs.127 at the end of 7 years, Rs.148 at
the end of 10 years and Rs.165 at the end of 12 years. In the case of the Treasury
Savings Deposit Certificates interest is paid every year but an adjustment is made in
the event of the holder deciding to encash it before maturity. In the case of National
Plan Savings Certificates the period of non-cashability will be fixed at 12 months. The
further issue of National Plan Certificates and 7 years National Savings Certificates
will be discontinued.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE POLICY
35. Fiscal and monetary policy at this juncture has to be designed in a way
that will make it clear beyond doubt that we on our part, are determined to do our best
to implement the Plan as fully as possible. We have to make the fullest effort to raise
the domestic resources required and I shall come presently to my tax proposals -which
reflect this determination. It is clear, however, that the problem is not merely one of
raising more domestic resources but also of finding ways and means firstly to conserve
and secondly to augment our foreign exchange resources in keeping with the large
requirements of the Plan. The steps we are taking in the field of domestic economic
policy will it is hoped, react beneficially on our foreign exchange position as well, but
this latter is, admittedly, a more difficult problem. What we can earn by way of foreign
exchange on our exports is not a matter entirely in our hands; it depends on the trend
of world prices and demands. Similarly, the prices we have to pay for our imports are
beyond our control and all that we can do is to limit the volume of our imports. Here
again, there are problems. The cuts we impose on imports become effective only after
a time lag. Moreover, a developing economy needs increasing imports and there is
danger, in a restrictive import policy, of impending the flow of imports needed for the
very purpose of development. Foreign exchange policy is thus a matter of delicate
balancing and it is a balancing If I may say so, in which a favourable turn of the wind
could make a material difference.
36. In the March White Paper the various measures taken to save and conserve
foreign exchange have been listed. The import programme for the first half of this
year involved considerable cuts in imports, and the process will, I am afraid, have to
be carried considerably farther in the import programme for the second half of the
year. Government have already announced their policy in regard to licensing of capital
goods imports. Private investors are being encouraged to seek medium term credits
from abroad and to invite foreign enterprise to associate itself increasingly with Indian
enterprise. We have in front of us a rather difficult period and we will have to exercise
the utmost caution and vigilance in the matter of imports while taking every possible
step to increase our export earnings. The fact that in the last twelve months the level
of imports has been exceptionally high warrants the presumption that the economy
can put up with sizeable import cuts for some time to come without serious dislocation.
At any rate, I wish to reiterate the Government’s determination to restore a position of
better balance in external account as early as possible.
10

37. An under-developed economy which launches upon programme of
industrialisation suffers from the inevitable handicap of having to import from abroad,
all or practically all, of the equipment and capital goods that it needs to make the right
start. Nevertheless, a start has to be made and in the process risks have to be undertaken.
In the nature of things it is not possible to chalk out the course of policy and action in
the field of foreign exchange with the same precision of detail as in case of domestic
policy. The second five year plan involves heavy foreign exchange expenditure and
the estimated gap in the balance of payments has widened partly because in some
respects the initial estimates were on the low side and partly because of the rise in
prices abroad. This gap is by no means easy to fill. We shall have to make our best
effort along the lines I have mentioned. At the same time, we must recognise that
external resources on a considerable scale will be necessary in order to enable us to
see through the developmental tasks we have taken in hand. Given reasonable effort
all along the line on our part, we shall, I am confident, get over the transitional
difficulties that are confronting us at present.
THE PLAN
38. The estimates of required outlay have gone up since the Plan was
formulated. The fulfilment of the Plan to schedule postulates, inter alia, the availability
of external resources on a considerable scale, and the need for these resources is the
greatest in the earlier part of the Plan. Evidently, shortfalls in this respect cannot be
made good by a draft on domestic resources. We have this aspect of the problem under
continuous review. It is not possible to say at this stage to what extent the progress of
the plan will be affected because of foreign exchange shortage. The core of the Plan
is steel, coal, transport and ancillary power. With the external assistance that has been
already promised and with further support from the International Bank and other
sources, we shall, I think, be able to carry through the projects in this “core”. This
group of programmes has the highest priority in view of its bearing on further
development. But, in regard to other projects, especially those for which no external
resources are specifically forthcoming, and which are not otherwise of high priority,
it would be prudent for us not to make fresh commitments for some time until the
outlook becomes clearer and we have more assurance of our being able to find the
foreign exchange resources needed for them. Some rephasing of the Plan is thus,
inevitable, but, if, as I hope, the balance of payments situation takes a turn for the
better before long and if we succeed in securing adequate external resources, the
achievement on the Plan should not fall much behind schedule.
39. Even if the Plan did not encounter difficulties in certain sectors-which it
does-a rephasing of it might be necessary in certain parts. The rapid development of
the country in the last few years has made it incumbent on our part to give closer
attention to the socio-economic objectives of the Plan. The Plan has set to itself the
objective of increasing national income progressively over a period of 15 to 20 years.
The urgency of development is related to the need for raising living standards all
11

round and for creating an environment in which democratic values and ways of life
take root and gather strength. To those who regard the Plan as too ambitious, I would
respectfully submit that they should take a good look at the living conditions of the
bulk of our people. If they would only do this, I am sure they will, along with me, be
able to see the several directions in which the Plan is inadequate. In the last few years
there has been some visible improvement in the standards of nutrition and probably,
of clothing. The housing conditions and environmental hygiene in urban and rural
areas of the low income groups are deplorable; the slums in our cities are a disgrace
to any society which claims to be considered civilised. I am deeply anxious to see that
the Plan is strengthened in this respect.
40. Let us not forget that the very fact that a measure of success has been
achieved already in raising living standards makes it all the more urgent that the
process be carried forward with vigour and determination. The millions in India have
woken up to new desires and new wants for the first time in many generations. With
knowledge that a better future for all is possible has come the aspiration that the
desired improvements should take place without delay. Whether it is the demand of
industrial labour for higher wages and better housing conditions, or of low-paid teachers
and government employees for a fair deal and greater security-all these are but
manifestations of the new awakening and of the new striving for an economic future
which is consistent with the dignity of the citizens of a free society. One cannot
merely shrug one’s shoulders in the midst of such a situation and say that all these
things must wait till somehow or other the financial situation in the country improves.
Whatever the difficulties of the moment, the demands of the people-especially of the
low-income groups-must be assessed carefully and met to the maximum possible extent.
Admittedly, there has to be some order of priorities in dealing with the legitimate but
innumerable claims of the people. Even among the less fortunate sections of the society,
there are at present wide disparities in income- and it is essential that the needs of
some should take precedence over those of others. The employees of State Governments
and local bodies, for example who are also doing great national service enjoy conditions
of service which are less favourable than those for Central Government employees. I
would humbly venture the claim that the Central Government have taken a lead recently
in bettering the conditions of these people; but in view of the somewhat strained
finances of many States, we have not been able to make much headway. The point
remains that in attempting to improve the living conditions of the people, every care
has to be taken to make a beginning where it is most needed. I am also aware that the
claims of investment should not go overboard in attempting a speedy improvement in
the living conditions. But when all the concessions to reality are made, the fact remains
that to pronounce that our present plan is too ambitious would be a declaration of
defeat in advance. The tasks we have in hand are worthwhile. Their successful
completion will make a significant contribution to further development. There should
be no stinting of effort or sacrifice in the furtherance of these tasks.
12

41. The Plan is the main theme and the dominant concern of all our thinking
and policy formulation. It could not be otherwise in a country which accepts
development as its topmost priority. The Plan has run into difficulties, but I see no
warrant for alarm or panic. What is required is preparedness to make the necessary
sacrifices, and courage and resourcefulness in handling the problems that arise in the
course of its implementation.
TAXATION POLICY
42. This brings me to the most crucial aspect of economic policy, viz., taxation.
I should like first to enumerate briefly the objectives of our taxation policy before I
come to taxation proposals for the year. Taxation policy and Proposals at this juncture
have to be shaped in the light of the following criteria:(a)

They must produce a sizeable addition to public revenues;

(b)

they must, provide incentives for larger earnings and more savings;

(c)

they must restrain consumption over a fairly wide field so as to keep in
cheek domestic inflationary pressures and to release the resources required
for investment; and

(d)

they must initiate such changes in the tax structure as would make tax
yields progressively more responsive to increased incomes and facilitate
an orderly development of the economy with due regard to the social
objectives we have adopted.

43. As I stated in my Budget speech in March last, the overall budgetary
deficit of Rs.365 crores which I left uncovered then is too large in the context of the
present economic situation. The changes which I am now incorporating in this Budget
leave this initial deficit practically unchanged, and I think it is vital for us to find ways
and means of bringing down this deficit significantly. The other criteria of policy
which I have just mentioned need hardly be elaborated but their application, I hope,
will be clear as I proceed with the elucidation of my tax proposals for the year.
INDIRECT TAXATION
44. I might begin first with my proposals in the field of indirect taxation.
Taking Customs first, it will be appreciated that the scope for raising additional revenues
from, them is limited. Hon’ble Members are aware of the severe restrictions we have
imposed on imports in order to curtail our foreign exchange expenditure. Moreover,
import duties on most of the so-called luxury articles are already fairly high and the
duties on capital goods and industrial raw materials have necessarily to be kept as low
as possible. The proposals I have made envisage the raising of the rates of duty by
small amounts on about 90 items. I have also taken this opportunity to rationalise the
rates in the Customs Tariff which run into several hundred items. There is considerable
diversity in these rates which is of no real significance and is in fact administratively
cumbrous. I have tried to give the tariff rates a simpler form and in this process the
13

surcharges have been merged into the basic rates. I have also availed myself of this
opportunity to convert the rates of duty both in the import and export tariff in terms of
decimal coverage. No other change is being made in the export duties. Altogether, my
proposals in respect of import duties will yield a revenue of about Rs.6 crores spread
over a large number of items, too numerous to mention here.
45. (Excise Duties) - I now come to Union Excise Duties. I may say at once
that I have fairly substantial proposals under this head, and in doing so, I have in mind
the double objective of restraining consumption and of giving a fillip to exports. I
propose the following increases:(i)

(Motor spirit) - The existing excise duty which works out at 96 N.P. per
Imperial Gallon inclusive of surcharge be raised to 125 N.P. per Imperial
Gallon. This will yield an additional revenue of Rs.6.65 crores in a full
year.

(ii)

(Refind Diesel Oil) - The existing duty of 25 N.P. per I.G. be raised to 40
N.P. per I.G. This is estimated to yield Rs.1.90 crores in a full year.

(iii) (Diesel oil, not otherwise specified) - The duty be raised from Rs.30 per
ton to Rs.40 per ton, the additional yield from which over a year is estimated
at Rs.35 lakhs.
(iv)

(Kerosene) - The existing duty of 18.75 N.P. per I.G. be increased
fractionally to 20 N.P. per 1.G. This will yield Rs.2 0 lakhs in a full year.

(v)

(Cement) - The existing duty of Rs.5 per ton be raised to Rs.20 per ton,
the estimated annual yield being Rs.6.7 crores.

(vi)

(Steel ingots) - The existing duty of Rs.4 per ton be raised to Rs.40 per
ton, yielding on an annual basis Rs.5.7 crores.

(vii) (Sugar) - The existing duty of Rs.5.62 per cwt. be raised to Rs.11:25 per
cwt. This will yield Rs.18.55 crores in a full year.
(viii) (Vegetable non-essential oils) - The duty of Rs.7 0 per ton be raised to
Rs.112 per ton. This will mean an increase from about 3 N.P. to 5 N.P. per
lb. The estimated yield on this account is Rs.3.15 crores in a year.
(ix)

(Tea) - The duty be raised as follows:(a) loose tea-from 6.25 N.P. per lb. to 10 N.P. per lb.
(b) package tea converted from duty paid loose tea-from 18.7 5 N.P. per
lb. to 35 N.P. per lb.
(c) package tea-from 25 N.P. per lb. to 45 N.P. per lb.

This will yield an additional revenue of Rs.2.45 crores in a year.
14

(x)

(Coffee) - The existing duty be raised from 18.75 N.P. per lb. to 35 N.P.
per lb., the estimated additional yield being Rs.80 lakhs.

(xi)

(Unmanufactured tobacco) - The duty be raised as under:(a) if other than flue-cured and used for the manufacture of cigarettes or
smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes-from 56 N.P. per lb. to 75
N.P. per lb.
(b) if not flue-cured and not actually used for the manufacture of cigarettes
or smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes and such tobacco cured
in whole leaf form and packed or tied in bundles, hanks or bunches or
in the form of twists or coils-from 37 N.P. per lb. to 50 N.P. per lb.
(c) if other than flue-cured and not otherwise specified-from 87 N.P. per
lb. to 10 0 N.P. per lb.

The additional yield from these increases aggregates Rs.6.15 crores in a full
year.
(xii) (Matches) - The existing duties be raised so as to permit of sale of
match boxes at 6 N.P. and 4 N.P. per match box of 60’s and 40 is
respectively. The gain to revenues in full year by these increases is
estimated at Rs.6.2 crores.
(xiii) (Paper) - My proposals involve an increase in the existing duty on various
types of paper the aggregate additional yield being estimated at Rs.2 crores
on an annual basis.
46. These proposals in respect of Central Excise Duties are estimated to yield
Rs.60.80 crores in a full year. For the remaining part of the current year, their yield is
estimated at Rs.53.20 crores, out of which the share of the States will be about Rs.4.2
crores in respect of tobacco and matches.
47. In recommending these increases, I have kept in mind the need for a
balanced increase among the various items I have listed. The increases proposed in
respect of cement and steel are large, but they are warranted by the rapid increase in
the demand for them within the economy and the situation of growing shortage and
the consequent increase in retail prices which we are facing. The increase in the duty
on sugar has the same objective as the increase we made last year in the excise duty
on cloth, namely, to restrain domestic consumption in the interest of larger exports. In
the case of matches, the existing duties were fixed with a view to ensuring sale at 3
piece per match box of 60’s and 2 piece per match box of 40’s. Under the decimal
coinage system the equivalent of these pr ices comes to 4.7 N.P. and 3.1 N.P. respectively
and this would have meant in effect a retail price of 5 N.P. and 3 N.P. respectively.
With the increase in the excise duty now proposed, the retail price will be 6 N.P. and
4 N.P. respectively.
15

48. As regards tobacco, it is known that a Tobacco Expert Committee was
appointed in January, 1956 under the chairmanship of Shri Raghuramiah, M.P., to
review the procedure adopted in applying the criterion for assessment of
unmanufactured tobacco. The Committee after careful consideration of the problem
has recommended that the criterion of ‘capability’ of use for manufacture of bidis
should be revised by the criterion of ‘physical form’ of tobacco other than flue-cured
for purposes of assessment. Accordingly, such tobacco is proposed to be reclassified
on the basis suggested by the Committee. For revenue purposes, the rates of duties on
such tobacco are also being somewhat enhanced. With the proposed increase in the
rate of duty on these two types of tobacco the rate of excise duty on unmanufactured
tobacco for use in the manufacture of cigarettes is also being proportionately raised.
49. The tariff relating to paper has been re-arranged with a view to greater
rationalisation and to absorb the higher profit margins now developing in the retail
trade and the rates of excise duty which had been kept deliberately low in the initial
stages are being enhanced.
50. Finally, following the increases in the rates of excise duty on vegetable
non-essential oils and strawboards and millboards, the existing slab exemption in
favour of small producers of these commodities are being suitably revised by executive
notifications.
DIRECT TAXATION
51. I turn now to direct taxation. Firstly, I propose to make certain adjustments
in personal income-tax and super-tax rates. Till now, these changes have followed a
standard pattern which, I think, needs a fundamental change. It is necessary to recognise
that the basic rates should apply to the person who earns his income, that is, sweats
and tolls for it, and that others who derive their income from property and investments,
that is, without making any direct effort should be made to pay more by a surcharge.
Under the present system there is no provision for earned income allowance for supertax. For income-tax there is an allowance of 20 per cent subject to a maximum of
Rs.4,000.for earned incomes not exceeding Rs.25,000. For incomes in excess of this
amount, the allowance of Rs.4,000 is reduced at the rate of 20 per cent of the excess
over Rs.25,000 so that for an earned income of Rs.45,000 the allowance is reduced to
nil. I now propose to change this system altogether, applying a standard schedule of
rates to all earned incomes and imposing a higher surcharge on unearned incomes. I
have come to the conclusion that our existing rates of direct tax at top levels deprive
the tax structure of all flexibility. It is said that they tend to diminish the incentive for
work but I am aware that they encourage large scale evasion. It is now recognised that
the very high rates of direct taxation in the top income brackets in many countries of
the world are in practice tolerated or tolerable only because of considerable evasion
that takes place. In other words, the high rates tend to be applied to a corroded tax
base. I now propose a revised schedule of these rates and introduce a new scheme of
surcharge levy which will mean that the total of the income-tax, super-tax and surcharge
16

for the highest slab will be brought down from the existing level of 91.8 per cent to
84 per cent for unearned and 77 per cent for earned incomes. The surcharge will be 5
per cent on the tax computed at the standard schedule rates for earned incomes up to
Rs.1 lakh and 10 per cent on incomes in excess of that sum, For unearned incomes,
there will be a uniform surcharge of 20 per cent over the standard schedule rates.
When a person’s income is partly earned and partly unearned, the unearned income
will he considered to belong to the slab in which the earned income ends and to higher
slabs where necessary. The rates for, the lower slabs have been adjusted in keeping
with this change in respect of top slabs. To provide relief to the middle classes, I
propose that no surcharge on unearned income be levied where the total income does
not exceed Rs.7,500. The reduction in the rates of direct taxation will cost Exchequer
Rs.71/2 crores. This reduction should, however, be judged in the light of the other
changes in direct taxation which I mention later.
52. I propose also to widen the present income-tax base by reducing the taxable
minimum from Rs.4,200 to Rs.3,000. The minimum limit had been raised over the
past few years mainly for administrative reasons. An income of Rs.4,200, modest
though it is in absolute terms, is quite a large multiple of the average level of incomes
in the country. It is reasonable to expect that those with an income over Rs.3,000
should also make their contribution, however small, to the public exchequer, and
should come within the range of direct taxation. As development proceeds, there will,
I expect, be a large and progressive increase in the number of incomes within this
range and I think it is essential if the Exchequer is to benefit proportionately from the
expansion i of incomes consequent on development, that these incomes are brought
within the income tax range. I, therefore, propose to place the exemption limit now at
Rs.3,000 for individuals and Rs.6,000 for Hindu Undivided Families. I propose,
however, to couple this with an increased allowance for married people. The extra
tax-free slab of Rs.1,000 which at present applied to married people will now be
raised to Rs.2,000. The wider coverage of income-tax consequent on this set of proposals
will bring in about Rs.5 crores this year.
53. My next proposal relates to the taxation of Companies. I propose to raise
the income-tax payable by Companies from the present level of 4 annas in the rupee
to 30 per cent and the Corporation Tax from the present level of 2 annas 9 pies in the
rupee to 20 per cent. As Hon. Members are aware, shareholders of Companies are
entitled to credit of income-tax paid on their behalf by the Company. The net effect of
the proposal to increase income-tax on Companies will, therefore, not be very
significant. It will to some extent help us to cheek tax evasion.
The need for corporate savings is as great as ever. In view, however, of the
increase proposed by me in the rate of Corporation Tax, I propose to reduce the
Excess Dividends Tax to 10 per cent on distribution of dividends between 6 per cent and 10 per cent
of the paid-up capital,
17

to 20 per cent on distribution between 10 per cent and 18 per cent of the paidup capital, and
to 30 per cent on the balance.
During the debate on the Finance (No.3) Bill introduced by me last December,
reference was made by certain Members to the stimulus that my proposals were likely
to give to bonus share issues. I was aware then that with the increase in the rates of
Excess Dividends Tax and the introduction of the Capital Gains Tax, there should be
some change in the rates of tax on bonus issues. I have considered this matter and
propose to raise the tax thereon from the present level of 121/2 per cent to 30 per cent.
54. At present, rates of super-tax for inter-corporate dividends are about 17
percent for Indian Companies and 20 per cent for foreign companies. With increase in
the basic rates of Corporation Tax, these rates require adjustment. I propose accordingly,
to reduce the rate of inter-corporate super-tax to 10 per cent for both Indian and
foreign companies on dividends received from Indian subsidiaries. The effect of this
will be that, so far as foreign companies working through subsidiaries are concerned,
the total tax payable by them will remain practically unaltered. Similarly, for foreign
companies operating through branches and earning other incomes, the rate of
Corporation Tax will be reduced from 36 per cent to 30 per cent. I expect that, with
these changes, there will be some encouragement to the investment of foreign capital
in India.
55. My next proposal with regard to Companies relates to the tax on
undistributed profits of companies in which the public are not substantially interested.
This tax has frequently been the subject matter of considerable argument. The principle
on which the tax is based is unexceptionable, namely, that individuals having income
in the higher brackets should not be allowed to avoid payment of super-tax by forming
close corporations and not distributing their profits in such corporations. However, in
the context of our development plans, we have to balance against the need to prevent
super-tax avoidance the needs of companies for funds required for expanding industrial
activities. I propose to reduce to 45 per cent the minimum percentage of available
profits which an industrial company of the above type should distribute in order to
avoid the penal consequences of inadequate distribution; for non-industrial companies
the percentage will continue to be retained at 60 per cent. For a company which
derives profits partly from industrial activities and partly from other activities, the
minimum distribution required will be 45 per cent of available industrial profits and
60 per cent of other available profits. Investment companies will be required to distribute
100 per cent as usual. In cases where the accumulated profits and reserves are not less
than the paid-up capital or the value of the fixed assets, the minimum percentage
required to be distributed is at present 100 per cent for all companies. I propose to
reduce the percentage to 45 per cent for the industrial companies and 90 per cent for
others. With these reductions in the minimum amount required to be distributed, it
18

will be unnecessary to continue the present scheme of adjudication by the
Commissioner of income Tax and the Board of Referees on the business needs of
companies seeking total or partial exemption from the operation of the provisions
relating to minimum distribution.
56. There are certain other minor changes proposed upon which I do not wish
to dilate here. These relate to exemption from income-tax of employers’ contribution
to a recognised provident fund, increase in the percentage of the income that will
qualify for rebate of income-tax If saved in the provident fund or insurance, limitation
on the carry-forward of losses etc. I have also taken the opportunity of redrafting the
provision relating to deposits to be made by companies of a portion of their undistributed
profits and development rebate and depreciation allowances so as to bring out the
Government’s intention more clearly.
57. Altogether, the changes I propose in the taxation of Companies will bring
in additional receipts amounting to Rs.71/2 crores.
58. I come now to two new tax measures designed to alter the tax structure in
a way that will ensure a more effective and at the same time a more equitable basis for
taxation. My first proposal is to levy a Tax on Wealth. It is recognised that income as
defined by existing income Tax laws and practice is not a sufficient measure of tax
paying capacity and that the system of taxation on incomes has to be supplemented by
taxation based on wealth. This is more equitable and it also promises, over a period,
to reduce the possibilities of tax evasion. I mentioned earlier the reliefs in income-tax
at top levels of income which I am introducing this year. These reliefs are meant as an
encouragement to larger effort and greater initiative on the basis of which alone a
healthy and progressive economy can be built up. It is necessary at the same time to
adopt other measures which are egalitarian in intent but which do not have a disincentive
effect. The Tax on Wealth that I am now proposing is one such measure. This tax will
be payable by individuals, Hindu Undivided Families and companies. In the case of
individuals, values up to Rs.2 lakhs and in the case of Hindu Undivided Families
values up to Rs.3 lakhs will be exempted. In respect of wealth exceeding that amount
the rate will be 1/2 per cent for the first Rs.10 lakhs, 1 per cent for the next 10 lakhs
and 11/2 per cent on the balance. This will thus be a progressive tax which, together
with the surcharges I have recommended in respect of income-tax on unearned incomes,
will contribute towards a more effective taxation of the richer classes without
diminishing incentives to earn in the process.
59. In the case of Companies, there will be no tax on assets up to a value of
Rs.5 lakhs; on values beyond that the rate will be 1/2 per cent. The Wealth Tax is
intended primarily as a measure of personal taxation but in the peculiar economic
structure of India I consider it advisable not to exclude Companies from the purview
of this tax. However, the rate of tax has to be low. This is why I have proposed a flat
rate of only 1/2 per cent on assets above the exemption limit I have just mentioned.
19

60.

Certain properties will be exempted from this tax., Some of these are:-

Agricultural properties;
Properties belonging to charitable or religious trusts;
Works of art;
Archaeological collections not intended for sale;
Balances in recognised provident funds and insurance policies;
Personal effects including furniture, care, jewellery, etc., up to a maximum of
Rs. 25,000; and Books and publications not intended for sale.
With a view to achieving simplicity in the procedure for evaluating the various
kinds of assets which form part of a business undertaking, it is proposed as far as
possible to treat the business undertaking as a whole as a single unit for valuation.
Other assets will be taken at their market value. The yield from this tax is estimated
at about Rs.15 crores.
The imposition of this tax as also the other measures now proposed should help
in checking evasion. I am taking credit of Rs.5 crores on this account.
61. Broadly speaking, the administrative set-up and the procedure for
assessment and appeal will be the same as for income-tax. With regard to valuation of
immovable non-agricultural property, the assessee will be given a right of reference to
an arbitration committee against the decision of the first appellate authority. This
committee will consist of a valuer appointed under the Estate, Duty Act and another
non-official member drawn from a panel of persons familiar wit) local property values.
62. The other proposal I make is the introduction of a Tax on Expenditure.
This is a form of taxation which has no backing as yet of historical experience. It is
however, a tax which. given effective administrative arrangements, can be a potent
instrument for restraining ostentatious expenditure and for promoting savings. In the
present circumstances, I think all we can do is to make a small beginning. I propose
to levy this tax only on individuals and Hindu Undivided Families whose income for
income tax purposes is not less than Rs.60,000 a year. The tax will be imposed on all
expenditure incurred, from whatever source it may be, in excess of certain sums which
will vary with the size of the family. The amounts excluded are:A basic amount of Rs. 24,000 for an assessee and his wife; and Rs. 5,000 for
each dependent child.
The rate of tax will be based on a slab system, the rate for each slab increasing
progressively with the increase in the level of expenditure. Thus, for excess expenditure
up to Rs.10,000 the rate will be 10 per cent and for higher slabs the rate will increase
progressively. As in the case of Wealth Tax, the administrative set-up and the assessment
20

and appellate procedure will be the same as for Income-Tax. I propose to make this
tax applicable from the financial year 1958-59 and therefore take no credit for any
receipts in 1957-58.
63. I propose to levy a tax on railway passenger fares. The rate of tax will be
5 per cent for distances up to 30 miles, 15 per cent for distances between 31 miles and
500 miles and 10 per cent for longer distances. No tax will be levied on season tickets.
The yield of this tax is expected to be Rs.14 crores in a whole year. In the current year,
the yield will be about Rs.8 crores. The proceeds of it less the amount attributable to
Union Territories will have to be distributed entirely to the States. The States need
more resources and railway travellers, like consumers of other commodities, should,
under present conditions, make a contribution. I propose to seek the advice of the
Finance Commission before I bring forward proposals before Parliament in regard to
the actual distribution of the proceeds of this tax.
CHANGES IN POSTAL RATES
64. The Postal and Telegraph Branches of the Posts and Telegraphs Department
are working at a loss. Except for unregistered letters and inland letter cards practically
all items of postal traffic are carried at a loss. On a number of items like post cards,
money orders, registered newspapers etc. the rates charged have, for many years, been
substantially less than the cost of providing the service. For example, it has been
estimated that the average cost of carrying a post card is 7.24 naye paise as against the
present postage of 5 naye paise. This results in an annual loss of over Rs.155 lakhs.
Every increase in traffic in these items- and traffic has been increasing- results in an
increase in the losses. With the progressively increasing expenditure on construction
of staff quarters and the provision of other amenities for the staff, the existing postal
rates are bound to prove even more uneconomic. The opening of unremunerative Post
Offices and Telegraph Offices as part of the Department’s expansion schemes under
the first and second five year plans has contributed to the loss in the Postal and
Telegraph Branches. The Department has also been building up its capital assets at a
fairly rapid rate, the total capital outlay at present being about three times what it was
before independence. The annual provision, from revenue, for depreciation and
replacement of these assets, as I have said before, is at present only Rs.1.25 crores,
and it has been decided to increase this provision to Rs.2.50 crores during the current
year in anticipation of a detailed examination of the whole question. In response to a
demand which had been widely and persistently voiced by the book trade, both in and
out of Parliament, Government had appointed a Committee to examine the question of
charging a concessional rate of postage on bonafide books as compared with other
items chargeable as packets so that the cost of sending books to rural areas which
could be reached only through Post Offices might not be unduly increased. After
considering the Book Committee’s Report, it has been decided to allow a concessional
rate of postage on books. All these measures, however, inevitably result in reducing
the surplus earnings of the Department and of increasing the losses of the Postal and
21

Telegraph Branches. To ensure the financial stability of the Department, it has become
necessary to raise some rates. On post cards, the existing rates of 5 naye paise for
single and 10 naye paise for the reply post cards will be raised to 6 naye paise and 12
naye paise respectively. Postage on local, post cards will be raised similarly from 3
naye paise for single and 6 naye paise for reply post cards to 4 naye paise and 8 naye
paise respectively. For packets containing bonafide books only, the postage on the
initial weight slab of 5 tolas will be reduced from the existing rate of 6 naye paise to
5 naye paise but on other packets the existing rate of 6 naye paise will be raised to 8
naye paise. The postage on additional weight slabs, in both these cases, will remain
unchanged. In spite of these adjustments in the book, sample and pattern packet rates,
the traffic in this category of articles will continue to result in a loss of over Rs.8 lakhs
per annum. The rates on parcels will be increased from the existing level of 50 naye
paise for every 40 tolas or fraction thereof to 60 naye paise for the 1st 40 tolas or
fraction thereof and 50 naye paise for every additional 40 tolas or fraction thereof. On
inland telegrams, the charge for every additional word over the minimum of 8 words
will be raised from 7 naye paise to 8 naye paise for ordinary and from 14 naye paise
to 16 naye paise for express telegrams. The additional revenue expected in the current
year from these increases is Rs.85 lakhs.
RECAPITULATION
65. I must now recapitualate briefly the proposals I have made so far:(i)

Firstly, my proposals involve small increases of import duties on a number
of articles, the additional yield from which during the year is estimated at
about Rs.6 crores.

(ii)

Secondly, the proposals I have made in respect of excise duties involve an
enhancement of the rates of duty on various items such as motor-spirit,
refined diesel oils and vaporising oil, diesel oil not otherwise specified,
steel ingots, cement, sugar, matches, unmanufactured tobacco other than
flue cured, vegetable non-essential oils, and paper. The additional revenues
on this account are estimated at Rs.53.20 crores for the remaining portion
of the current financial year but Rs.4.2 crores will be payable to the States
as their share of the additional duties on tobacco and matches.

(iii) Thirdly, the proposals I have made in regard to personal income-tax and
super-tax are estimated to bring in Rs.25 crores in the current year of
which the share of the States on account of income-tax will come to Rs.3
crores. The reduction in incomer-tax and super-tax rates involve a loss of
Rs.7.5 crores. The lowering of the exemption limit is estimated to yield
Rs.5 crores. The adjustments in Company taxation will yield about
Rs.7.5crores. The Tax on Wealth is estimated to yield Rs.15 crores, and to
this I add Rs.5 crores by way of better collections of income-tax reflecting
a reduction of tax evasion. The changes I have suggested in direct taxation
22

do not make a big addition to public revenues this year but I expect that
they will make an increasing contribution to the Exchequer as we get
more experience with the new forms of taxation I have proposed and as
the machinery for assessment and collection gets geared to its new tasks.
(iv)

Fourthly, I have proposed a tax on fares payable by passengers travelling
by Railway. This will yield Rs.8 crores which will be distributed entirely
to the States.

(v)

Fifthly, I have proposed changes in postal and telegram rates which are
expected to yield a revenue of Rs.85 lakhs.

(vi)

Sixthly, I have proposed an Expenditure Tax which will be effective from
1958-59 but will apply to expenditures incurred in 1957-58.

66. The net accretion to the Central revenues as a result of these proposals
will amount to Rs.77.85 crores and the revenue budget will now show a surplus of
Rs.44.73 crores. Ordinarily the over-all deficit would, as a consequence, amount to
Rs.290 crores, if the additional revenue of Rs.15 crores which would be passed on to
the States as a result of these proposals is not taken into account. As Hon. Members
will observe from the White Paper, Central assistance to the States for financing the
Plan during 1957-58 has been placed at Rs.278 crores. As a result of the additional
revenue accruing to the States, there will therefore be a corresponding reduction in
this figure, the reduction being taken in the provision for loans to the State Governments.
The overall deficit will thus amount to Rs.275 crores and will be met by expansion of
Treasury Bills.
TAXATION AND DEVELOPMENT
67. I would like to say a few words about the import of these proposals. We
are pledged to move in the direction of a socialist society. This means that we wish
to develop an efficient system of production and an equitable pattern of income and
wealth which will ensure well balanced progress. Such a system requires a
strengthening of incentives to work and to save. This is the rationale of my tax
concessions in earned incomes. A standard rate of tax on earned incomes, and a
differential rate for taxation of unearned incomes, coupled with a tax on wealth and
a tax on expenditure, will give us a better basis for assessment of tax liability,
especially in respect of higher income ranges, and will help us to close progressively
the loop-holes for tax evasion and corrosion of the tax base. If I have brought down
the exemption limit for tax liability it is, firstly, because the present limit is too high
in relation to the average, level of incomes in the country, and secondly, because I
am of the view that the ground must be prepared from now on for bringing into tax
net the increases in incomes which will take place in these ranges in the coming
years. All my proposals in the field of direct taxation form an inter-related whole,
and should, I suggest be judged as such.
23

68. My proposals in respect of company taxation are designed not merely to
increase revenues but also on balance, to encourage the ploughing back of profits
through a cheek on dividend distribution. These measures are not intended to curtail
genuine investment in the private sector, though it would not be unreasonable to
assume that a slight slowing down for a short period will not, in present circumstances
be undesirable. There are, however, other devices to regulate private investment. I
wish, therefore, to retain the bias in the tax structure in favour of corporate investment.
It is for this reason that I have left untouched the existing liberal depreciation allowances
and the system of development rebates, which it is recognised on all hand, are a
powerful incentive for investment. I have also as I mentioned earlier, re-adjusted the
tax rates to encourage foreign investment. I recognise that the shareholder or the
investor expects to get a reasonable return on his capital, but I also think that under
modern conditions there is even greater need for providing incentives for those who
work and manage concerns and thus fall within the category of earned income earners.
69. My proposals involve a raising of burdens on the near necessities of the
common man. This is inevitable in the present circumstances, These burdens, large as
they may look in the aggregate, have a low average incidence. A process of development
in a country where most incomes are low cannot be financed without calling for
sacrifices from all sections of the community, and there are special reasons at this
juncture for applying some restraint on consumption in order to cheek inflationary
pressures and to stimulate exports. I recognise, at the same time, the need in particular
sectors may well be from time to time to assist in maintaining consumption at a
reasonable level in terms of the minimum nutritional standards, and to this end, it may
be necessary to subsidise food. My intention, therefore, is to build up from out of the
additional receipts of taxation a food subsidy fund of the order of Rs.25 crores. This
fund will be used to keep down food prices, particularly for the mere vulnerable areas
and would I think prove a valuable instrument in the hands of my Honourable colleague,
the Food and Agriculture Minister.
70. The proposals that I have made will still leave the overall deficit for the
year at a level somewhat higher than I would consider safe; but it is not unwise in my
judgement to run a measure of risk especially If by doing so the expansionary impulse
in the economy can be maintained at a reasonably high level. A budgetary deficit
involves creation of fresh purchasing power in to the hands of the public than it
withdraws from it. The stresses and strains that have developed in the economy are a
warning against unrestricted deficit financing. I am not against deficit financing as
such; I recognise it can play a role in promoting development. But it is a medicine to
be taken in small closes; it is not food that would sustain the system. On the whole, I
doubt If we shall be able over the Plan period to undertake deficit financing of the
order indicated in the Plan, and this means we have to raise more resources by taxation,
loans and small savings. Considering the needs not only of the current year but also of
the next few years in terms of the second five year Plan, I am convinced that the
measures I have placed before the House today are essential and salutary.
24

71. Indeed, I feel confident that over a period, they will help us in getting out
of the stagnancy of public revenue relatively to national income, which is a bottleneck
from the point of view of further developmental planning. The ratio of public revenues
to taxation in India is low, even by the standards of relatively under-developed countries.
The way to raise it is to initiate structural changes in the tax system so as to make it
more progressive in terms of returns. The emphasis of my proposals is on this aspect
of the tax problem. The propriety of the changes I have suggested should be judged in
this light rather than in terms of their immediate yield. I have in effect, outlined the
tax structure for the Plan period. There will, undoubtedly, have to be some adjustments
in this structure from year to year, but I expect that these adjustments will be relatively
small, and of a marginal character. For the rest of the Plan period, our aim will be to
watch how the changes I have initiated this year work in practice and how the system
can be improved upon-to the benefit of the tax payer no less than in the interest of the
tax-receiver. Within this broad framework, I believe, all concerned can proceed with
their plans with confidence and assurance of sympathetic consideration by Government
of any genuine difficulties.
CONCLUSION
72. This brings me to the end of my story; I am aware that the policies and
proposals I have placed before you add up to a varied and somewhat formidable bill
of fare. But the exigencies of the situation demand nothing less. There are moments in
the history of every nation when it must advance on a great many fronts at the same
time. The task before us is not merely one of raising resources for the immediate
needs of the Plan. We have also to attempt at the same time a rationalisation of the tax
structure so that it can sustain a mounting crescendo of developmental effort in CW
years to come. I am one of those who also believe that the greatest advances towards
economic equality and positive social improvement are made in difficult times when
the conscience and the solidarity of a people are raised to the highest pitch. This I
believe is one of the chief lessons of the second world war. Sacrifice on a nation-wide
scale and injustice or excessive inequality go ill together. And that is why I have
endeavoured in the present budget to snatch from the needs of the moment an
opportunity for imparting a new turn to our tax structure towards greater efficiency
and I hope greater equity. A heavy responsibility rests on us all at this juncture, and I
have presented to the House an approach in terms of policies and of proposals which
is to the best of my judgement appropriate to this responsibility. I hope when the time
comes for someone to judge whether we rose to the occasion or not, we shall have to
our credit a record worthy of this House and of the nation.
(May 15, 1957)

25

