SPEECH OF SHRI JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU
PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1958-59

According to custom, the Budget statement for the coming year has to be
presented today. By an unexpected and unhappy chain of circumstances, the Finance
Minister, who would normally have made this statement this afternoon, is no longer
with us. This heavy duty has fallen upon me almost at the last moment.
2.
The times are not propitious in many ways and within the last few days
all of us here and the entire nation has suffered a grievous loss by the passing away of
a leader of our people who had been a tower of strength to all of us both in the days
when we were in the wilderness and when, a measure of fulfilment came with its new
problems and burdens. So I stand before this House today with a sense of desolation
and a feeling of unfitness for the task that fate and circumstances have thrust upon me.
I seek the indulgence of this House.
3.
Last year, my distinguished predecessor in this office presented a Budget
statement which, in some respects, was unusual and which involved substantial additions
to taxation. Some novel taxes were introduced and an attempt was made to bring
about gradually a reorientation of the tax structure of the country. I believed then, and
I believe now, that this was right direction for us to travel and that we should continue
to pursue this path. With experience we may no doubt make changes here and there
and advance further in that direction, but I think that the major steps that we had taken
last year have to continue. The times we live in and the problems that our country has
to face do not permit a static or complacent approach or any avoidance of the burdens
which inevitably accompany an attempt to advance with some speed. Our objective of
striving peacefully and cooperatively towards the realisation of a socialist pattern of
society also prevents us from thinking or acting along the old grooves, or seeking
some present respite by slowing down or halting development. While we should always
be prepared to reconsider the methods we adopt, should this become necessary, we
h4Ve to strive with all our strength for our planned development by conserving all our
resources, increasing production and trying to ensure progressively a more equitable
distribution, and thus to raise the standards of the great mass of our people.
4.
In the circumstances that we face today, I can only present before this
House what might be called a pedestrian Budget statement, which is in the main a
continuance of things as they are, with relatively minor changes, or such changes as
naturally flow from what we did last year. This statement relates to the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for 1958-59.
1

REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
5.
Following the usual practice I propose to review briefly the economic
conditions in the country during the current year against the background of which the
budget has to be considered. An economic survey, covering the major developments
in the economy during 1957-58 and explaining the impact of the various measures
adopted, is being circulated to Honourable Members along with the Budget papers. I
propose, therefore, to review only briefly the main trends in the economy.
6.
There has been some improvement in the economic situation in recent
months. Prices have tended to come down and the decline in foreign exchange reserves
has slowed down markedly. The money market is easier and expansion of money
supply and bank credit have been brought under control. The measures adopted to
cheek inflationary pressures and correct the strain an the balance of Payments are
proving effective.
PRICES
7.
Wholesale prices were comparatively stable in the early months of the
year, but there was a sharp rise between May and August when the index went up
from 107 to 112. After August, prices have tended to fall. In recent weeks, the index
has been around 105, which is slightly lower than the level about a year ago. The
index for cereals which had gone up from. 97 in December 1956 to 106 in March
1957 was again at 98 in December 1957. The improvement has been due to the various
measures taken to hold the price level, including controls at particular points and
restraints on bank credit; it is also a reflection of the improved supplies position. This
latter is, however, due to large imports which the country can hardly afford.
PRODUCTION
8.
Agricultural production in 1956-57 recorded a rise, of some 6 per cent
over the previous year’s level, the improvement being shared by both foodgrains and
other crops. The output of foodgrains in 1956-57 was 3.4 million tons more than in
1955-56. This year, however, there have been droughts over considerable areas in the
country, and the supply position is difficult.
9.
Industrial production has continued to expand, but the rate of expansion
this year has been much more modest than in the last few years. There have,
nevertheless, been significant increases in certain lines, both in the, capital goods as
well as in. the consumer goods categories, and further additions to production capacity
are being made.
MONETARY SITUATION
10. In the stock market, there was a declining trend in both prices and turnover.
The prolonged period of boom which started in 1953 ended in 1956. The decline in
equity prices, as measured by the Reserve Bank’s index of variable dividend industrial
securities was 16 per cent in 1957and 25 per cent as compared to August 1956.
2

11. The gilt-edged market was weak in the early part of the year. There has,
however, been a revival, in recent months, in the demand for investment, especially in
short-dated securities. Since September last, the stringency in the money market has
been less acute, t and investments of scheduled banks in Government securities
increased by Rs.67 crores between September and December. State loans have also
improved slightly and there has been sustained buying in some of them. The net
decline in the prices of Government securities in 1957 has been 0.7 per cent.
12. A noticeable feature in the monetary situation in 1957 has been the smaller
expansion in money supply and in bank credit in 1957 as compared to the previous
year. Money supply with the public increased by Rs.97 crores in 1957 as compared to
Rs.132 crores in 1956 and Rs.215 crores in 1955. The expansion of bank credit was
Rs.80 crores i.e., less than half the expansion 4n the previous year. The time deposits
with the banks increased by Rs.201 crores during the year. This has eased the strain on
the banks’ resources.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
13. Honourable Members are aware of the continuous strain on our balance
of payments since the beginning of the Second Plan. The Reserve Bank’s foreign
assets which, at the end of 1956, stood at Rs.530 crores dropped to Rs.453 crores at
the end of June 1957 despite the drawal of Rs.95 crores from the International Monetary
Fund during that period. Between July and December 1957 the foreign assets declined
by a further Rs.155 crores to Rs.298. crores. As a result of the remedial steps taken by
Government, the rate of net withdrawal has perceptibly fallen in recent months. The
monthly average rate of withdrawal came down from Rs.36 crores in the second
quarter of 1957 to Rs.18 crores in the last quarter of that year. In recent weeks, it has
been below Rs.3 crores a week.
14. The House will recall that the last year of the First Plan closed with a
balance of payments surplus on current account of Rs.17 crores, including credits
totalling to Rs.42 crores on account of foreign assistance. During 1956-57 the position
was reversed and a current account deficit of about Rs.292 crores emerged, after
taking credit of Rs.40 crores of foreign assistance. The payments deficits during each
of the quarters of that year was Rs.44.5 crores, Rs.81.4 crores, Rs.84.8 crores and
Rs.81.8 crores respectively. For the quarter ending June 1957, the deficit was Rs.149.7
crores and it was also about the same - Rs.148 crores - for the quarter July-September.
These large deficits in the balance of payments have been due to a substantial increase
in imports and a slight decline in exports, and the bulk of the increase in imports has
been in respect of capital goods and industrial raw materials required for development.
15. The improvement in the balance of payments, to which I referred earlier,
thus relates to the period after September. Satisfactory as this latest trend is, it will be
necessary to continue and accelerate the effort we are making, both in the matter of
keeping down imports and of increasing exports, in order to bring the balance of
3

payments position to a satisfactory state. The problem is no longer one of reducing
payments in terms of a particular currency or group of currencies, but of securing an
all round improvement.
16. The House is aware of the steps that have been taken to meet the difficult
balance of payments position. Drastic cuts have been made in the imports of consumer
goods, and strict vigilance is being exercised in respect of the licensing of imports
including imports of capital goods. Efforts are being made simultaneously to secure
external assistance and deferred payment terms for projects in both the public and
private sectors having high priority and likely to save foreign exchange.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
17. In the current year the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development assisted in financing the country’s development projects by sanctioning
loans of Rs.43 crores for railway development, Rs.15 crores for the expansion of the
Tata Iron & Steel works and Rs.5 crores for the construction of the Trombay Thermal
Station in Bombay. Negotiations are under way for obtaining loans from the Bank for
the development of ports, the Koyna Hydro Electric Project and the Damodar Valley
Corporation. In the last two or three months there have been various offers of assistance
from friendly foreign countries for the economic development of this country. Last
month the Government of the United States offered a loan of approximately $ 225
million (about Rs.107 crores) from out of the currently available resources of the
United States Export Import Bank and the President’s Development Loan Fund. An
official mission from this country is now negotiating details of the utilisation of this
offer. The United States Government are also considering as a matter of high priority,
further measures to assist us in getting over the present shortage of foodgrains. The
measure of assistance promised by the United States is expected to help us significantly
in financing our imports of essential capital goods over the next fifteen months.
18. The question of obtaining a postponement of certain payments which will
fall due in the next three years or so in respect of the Rourkela Steel Plant has been
under discussion with the West German Government. The deferring of these payments
has been agreed to in principle by that Government and the details are now the subject
of negotiation with the authorities in that country.
19. On the 4th February 1958, an agreement was signed with Japan under
which Japan would make available to India a sum of 18 billion yen (roughly Rs.24
crores) through the Export Import Bank of Japan to enable Government or parties
recommended by Government to make purchases from Japan. This line of credit will
be used for the purchase of Japanese goods including mostly industrial plant, machinery
and equipment. The loans will be repaid within a period of ten years and the rate of
interest will be decided on the basis of rate charged by the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
4

20. The Government of the U.S.S.R. also offered us a credit of 500 million
roubles (about Rs.60 crores) to be used in the form of technical assistance and
equipment. This will be used for the setting up of a heavy machine building plant, a
plant for the manufacture of coal mining machinery, an optical glass factory and a
thermal power station and for the development of the Korba Coalfields. This credit,
like the one given by them for the Bhilai Steel Plant, carries interest at the rate of 2.5
per cent per annum and is repayable in 12 equal annual instalments.
21. The United Kingdom Government have also offered to assist us by paying
in advance, on the 1st April 1958, three annual instalments of £ 4 million each due
from them under the arrangements made in 1955 for the transfer of sterling pensions.
22. We have recently signed an agreement with the Government of France for
economic and technical cooperation between the two countries. Under it the French
Government will facilitate the financing of the manufacture and supply of capital
goods for which orders are placed by Indian purchasers with French suppliers in the
twelve months following the date of signing of the agreement, up to a total amount of
25 billion francs (about Rs.28 crores). The terms of each contract would be settled
separately with the approval of both the Governments.
23. The total economic assistance made available to this country by friendly
foreign countries up to the end of March 1957 amounted to Rs.463 crores, out of
which Rs. 219 crores had been utilised by that date. The balance of about Rs.244
crores has mostly been committed for the supply of equipment and commodities.
During 1957-58, Canada has authorised 21 million dollars as assistance to this country
under the Colombo Plan. In addition, Canada has made a special grant o f 7 million
dollars for the purchase of wheat. She has also agreed to supply an additional quantity
of 400,000 tons of wheat on reasonable terms of credit to meet the food shortage,
The Ford Foundation has continued its assistance by a further allocation of 6.2
million dollars.
24. Under the various programmes of assistance already in operation or in
sight, the total foreign assistance to this country in the coming year is estimated at
Rs.325 crores for which credit has been taken in the budget. This assistance would
materially help in the implementation of the Second Five Year Plan and I am sure the
House would join me in expressing our appreciation to our friends who have come to
our assistance.
25. India, on her part, has continued to provide economic and technical
assistance to neighbouring countries particularly under the Colombo Plan. In Nepal,
where we have undertaken to provide aid upto Rs.10 crores, the expenditure in the
coming year has been estimated to be Rs.2.2 crores. We also promised to give a loan
of Rs.20 crores to Burma, of which Rs.15 crores will be, paid this year and the balance
next year.
5

FINANCIAL YEAR 1957-58
26. The Budget for the current year, as finally approved by Parliament, placed
the revenue at Rs.708.03 crores and expenditure at Rs.672.29 crores, leaving a surplus,
on revenue account, of Rs.35.74 crores. On present estimates, revenue is now likely to
amount to Rs.724.63 crores and expenditure to Rs.719.58 crores resulting in a small
surplus of Rs.5.05 crores. The drop of Rs.30.69 crores in the surplus is largely the
result of the additional transfer of Rs.341/2 crores to the States as a result of the
Finance Commission’s recommendations which have been accepted by Government.
27. I shall first briefly mention the important variations in the revenue estimate.
The revenue from Customs is now expected to be Rs.183 crores against the budget
estimate of Rs.167.6 crores. Excluding the additional duties levied on sugar, cloth and
tobacco, which accrue to the States, Union Excise Duties are now expected to yield
Rs.252.45 crores against the budget estimate of Rs.259.57 crores. The decrease of
Rs.7.12 crores is mainly due to a fall in the revenue from cloth and motor spirit. This
is partly counter-balanced by increased revenue from cement and diesel oils. No change
is anticipated in the budgeted figure of Rs.206.40 crores for Corporation Tax and
income Tax, but the share of the States will increase from Rs.65.98 crores to Rs.73.43
crores, as a result of the Finance Commission’s Award. The revenue from Wealth Tax
this year is now put at Rs.9 crores, a drop of Rs.3.5 crores in the original estimate due
to the time taken in obtaining necessary statements from assessees. The tax on Railway
fares is now expected to yield Rs.4.84 crores against the original budget of Rs.7
crores. The revenue from Posts and Telegraphs is likely to drop by Rs.2.72 crores to
Rs.1.23 crores, due partly to a fall in traffic and partly to the interim relief to low paid
employees granted recently. The dividend from Railways is now estimated at Rs.44.24
crores against the budget figure of Rs.43.79 crores. Of this sum, Rs.37.91 crores,
representing the interest element, is taken in reduction of interest payments on the
expenditure side and the balance credited as contribution to revenue. The variations
under other heads do not call for any special mention.
28. The expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs.719.58 crores-Rs.266.05
crores on Defence Services and Rs.453.53 crores under Civil heads.
29. The revised estimate of the net Defence expenditure is placed at Rs.266.05
crores against the budget estimate of Rs.252.71 crores. The increase is largely accounted
for by an additional provision of Rs.6.86 crores for the Army and Rs.6.80 crores for
the Air Force. The increase in the Army estimate is due mainly to the purchase of
additional stores, rise in prices, grant of additional dearness allowance and certain
other concessions allowed to personnel; and that in the Air Force Estimate, almost
entirely to the purchase of aircraft and equipment, mostly for replacement.
30. Civil expenditure shows an increase of Rs.33.95 crores over the budget
estimate of Rs.419.58 crores. Payments to States on account of their share of Union
Excise Duties and of grants under the substantive provision of Article 275(l) of the
6

Constitution have increased by Rs.39.90 crores as a result of the Finance Commission’s
award and the levy, of certain additional duties, in replacement of sales tax. There is
an increase of Rs.1 crore on account of additional dearness allowance granted during
the course of the year and an increase of Rs.21/2 crores in interest charges, due to
larger expansion of Treasury Bills than anticipated in the Budget. A provision of Rs.3
crores has also been made for writeback to revenue of losses on the Food Trading
Account. It will be recalled that a. Food Subsidy Fund of Rs.25 crores was intended
to be built up from the additional taxation levied this year, which if, unspent, would
have been available for the current and future years. But since the revenue surplus this
year, has been more or less absorbed by the transfer of additional resources to the
States under the Finance Commission’s award, it has not been possible to meet the
entire subsidy from revenue. The amount of this subsidy this year, will be Rs.30
crores and next year Rs.20 crores and it is proposed to write this back to revenue over
a period of 10 years. The increases I have mentioned amount in all to Rs.461/2 crores
roundly but they have been offset by savings under other heads of Rs.121/2 crores.
Thus there is a saving of Rs.5 crores under Education; Rs.1 crore under Community
Development; Rs.2 crores under Scientific Departments; Rs.1 crore in the grant to
States for development of backward classes and Rs.2 crores in respect of grants to
States towards expenditure necessitated by natural calamities. The balance of the savings
is spread over a number of heads.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1958-59
31. For the next year, on the basis of existing taxation, the revenue is estimated
at Rs.763.16 crores and expenditure at Rs.796.01 crores, leaving a deficit of Rs.32.85
crores on revenue account.
32. The revenue from Customs has been placed at Rs.170 crores, the decrease
of Rs.13 crores as compared with this year’s Revised estimates reflecting the effect of
the restrictions on imports, Excise duties are expected to yield Rs.260.45 crores,
excluding Rs.41.48 crores from additional duties on sugar, cloth and tobacco which
accrue in almost their entirety to the States. This is an improvement of Rs.8 crores
over the current year’s Revised estimate. Under income tax the revenue is placed at
Rs.217 crores, allowing for a normal expansion in revenue of Rs.101/2 crores over the
current year’s revised estimate. The Wealth Tax is expected to yield Rs.12.5 crores,
the tax on Railway fares Rs.9.22 crores and the Expenditure Tax Rs.3 crores. The
revenue from Posts and Telegraphs is estimated at Rs.2.34 crores against Rs.1.23
crores this year. The dividend payable by Railways next year is estimated at Rs.49.58
crores of which Rs.7.04 crores will be taken as contribution to revenue and the balance
of Rs.42.54 crores in reduction of interest payments on the expenditure side. The
surplus profits of the Reserve Bank next year have been placed at Rs.30 crores, the
same as in the current year. A credit of Rs.7.34 crores has also been taken on account
of the surplus of the cement account of the State Trading Corporation to be transferred
to Government. This amount will be utilised on the development of national highways.
7

The share of income tax payable to States next year will be Rs.76.97 crores against
the current year’s Revised estimate of Rs.73.43 crores.
33. Expenditure next year is estimated at Rs.796.01 crores of which Rs.278.14
crores will be on Defence Services and Rs.517.87 crores under the Civil heads.
34. Estimates for Defence Services show an increase of Rs.12.09 crores
over the Revised estimate for the current year. The increase is wholly in the Air
Force estimates mostly for the purchase of stores for replacement. The Navy estimates
show an increase of Rs.1.46 crores but this is offset by a reduction in the provision
for the Army.
35. Civil Expenditure next year shows an increase of Rs.64.34 crores over the
Revised estimate. Of this increase, payments to States of the proceeds of the additional
excise duties on sugar, cloth and tobacco account for Rs.27.96 crores. The greater part
of the balance is due to larger provision for nation-building development and social
services. A detailed account of individual items is, as usual, given in the Explanatory
Memorandum and only the more important items need be mentioned here.
36. The provision for expenditure on nation-building and development
services under Civil Administration amounts to Rs.130.09 crores as compared with
Rs.109.62 crores during the current year. The provision for Education at Rs.29.63
crores is higher by Rs.5.48 crores and includes Rs.11.97 crores for grants to States,
Rs.2.51 crores for scholarships and Rs.4.32 crores for grants to the University Grants
Commission. For expenditure on Medical and Public Health, the provision has been
increased from Rs.10.43 crores this year to Rs.16.03 crores next, year and for
agriculture and allied services, the provision made next year is Rs.17.64 crores
against the current year’s Revised estimate of Rs.16.85 crores. The provision for
Scientific Research has also been stepped up by Rs.3.7 crores and that for industries
and Supplies by Rs.1.62 crores.
37. Larger provision is also being made for Community Development and
National Extension Service and for welfare of Scheduled Tribes and development of
Backward Areas and for Employment Exchanges, the increase next year over the
current year’s Revised estimate being Rs.3.86 crores.
38. The estimates also include a provision of Rs.6 crores for grants to States
to help them to raise the emoluments of their low paid employees, the corresponding
provision for 1957-58 being Rs.5 crores. The newly constituted Naga Hills and
Tuensang District will cost about Rs.3.64 crores next year. Gross interest charges will
increase by Rs.17.60 crores of which Rs.15.04 crores will be recovered from the
commercial departments and the State Governments.
39.
of heads.

The rest of the increase in Civil Expenditure is spread over a number
8

CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
40. The current year’s budget provided for a capital outlay of Rs.455 crores,
excluding an adjusting item of Rs.95 crores in respect of loan assistance from the
U.S.A. Government, which is transferred, to the Special Development Fund by debit
to capital. The Revised estimates provide for an outlay of Rs.427 crores, a reduction
of Rs.28 crores. Owing to better availability of materials, particularly steel and track
materials, following the special arrangements made for the procurement abroad and
the extension of the scheme of electrification to certain sections, Railways are expected
to spend Rs.14 crores more than estimated. Against this increase under Railways, a
saving of Rs.29 crores is expected in the provision of Rs.157 crores for steel projects,
Rs.11 crores on food purchases and Rs.2 crores under other heads, leaving a net
saying on capital account of Rs.28 crores.
41. Capital expenditure in the coming year is estimated at Rs.412 crores
excluding a formal adjusting debit of Rs.7 8 crores in respect of loan assistance from
the United States Government mentioned earlier. The drop of Rs.15 crores over the
Revised estimate is due to a reduction of Rs.38 crores in the net outlay on food
purchases and the special receipt of Rs.16 crores from the United Kingdom as advance
payments on account of sterling pensions which is taken in reductions of expenditure,
partly offset by increases under other heads. An increased provision of Rs.31 crores
has been made for the steel plants and Rs.10 crores for industrial development. Details
of the provision under the various heads are given in the Explanatory Memorandum.
42. In addition to the provision for direct capital outlay by the Centre just
mentioned, the estimates include Rs.288 crores for loans to State Governments and
Rs.71 crores for loans to Port Trusts, Statutory Corporations, foreign Governments
etc. in the current year against an original provision of Rs.238 crores and Rs.86 crores
respectively. The increase in the loans to State Governments is largely due to ways
and means advances and payments on account of their share of the net collections
from small savings. In recent years the State Government have been receiving a portion
of these collections in their States as loans from the Centre. This share was raised
during the current year from about 1/4th of the net collections to 2/3rds. Some arrears
were also due to the States in respect of the previous year which have been paid to
them. Savings of Rs.15 crores are, however, expected in the provision for other loans
despite the fact that the Government of Burma are drawing an additional sum of Rs.5
crores against the loan assistance of Rs.20 crores promised to them some time back
and an increase of Rs.5 crores is also expected in the loans to the Industrial Finance
Corporation. The provision of Rs.15 crores made in the budget for loans to the Refinance
Corporation is not likely to be required this year. For the next year a total provision of
Rs.362 crores has been made for loans, of which Rs.284 crores will be for State
Governments and Rs.78 crores for others. Broad details of these loans are given in the
Explanatory Memorandum.
9

43. Before passing on to a consideration of the ways and means position, an
account may be given of the total provision included in the estimates of the coming
year for the execution of the Five Year Plan and the magnitude of the total Plan outlay
in the coming year. The Budget now presented to the House includes a total provision
of Rs.743 crores for the implementation of the Plan -Rs.122 crores in the revenue
budget and Rs.621 crores in the capital budget. Out of this provision, Rs.53 crores
will be provided from the revenue budget and Rs.178 crores from the capital budget
for assistance to the States. In addition to this, the Railways will be spending Rs.93
crores from their own resources on the Plan and the States Rs.181 crores. The total
plan outlay in 1958-59, including interest on loans on river valley projects treated as
capital outlay and short term loans, will amount to Rs.1017 crores.
WAYS AND MEANS
44. The current year’s budget provided for an overall deficit of Rs.284 crores,
of which Rs.275 crores were expected to be covered by the issue of Treasury Bills and
the balance by drawing down the cash balances. The Revised estimates place the
overall deficit at Rs.380 crores which will be met entirely by the expansion of Treasury
bills. This deterioration in the ways and means position is due mainly to three factors.
First, the anticipated revenue surplus of Rs.3 6 crores has, as explained earlier, been
mostly absorbed by the additional payments to the States as a result of the
recommendations of the Finance Commission. Secondly, the net yield from small
savings has been below estimate, and a drop of Rs.20 crores is now expected in the
budgeted receipt of Rs.80 crores. Thirdly, external assistance, for which a credit of
Rs.150 crores was taken in the budget, is now expected to amount to only Rs.105
crores, the balance being carried over to the coming year. Part of the shortfall will,
however, be met by savings in the capital outlay under a number of heads so that the
net deterioration in the position is not likely to be more than about Rs.95 crores.
45. In the current year Government floated two new loans, the 31/2 Per Cent
National Plan Bonds 1967 at an issue price of Rs.99.5 and the 4 Per Cent Loan 1972
at par. Conversion facilities were offered for the 3 Per Cent Victory Loan 1957 and
the 3 Per Cent Loan 1958 which was due for repayment in the following year.
Subscriptions to the new loans amounted to Rs.10 6 crores, of which Rs.45 crores
came by way of conversion. Later in the year, when a demand for more investment
developed in the market, a re-issue of the 31/4 Per Cent Loan 1962 was made through
the Reserve Bank. The entire sum of Rs.30 crores of this re-issue has been absorbed
by the market. The outstanding balance of the 3 Per Cent Victory Loan 1957, which
was not converted into the new loans, was repaid in cash. The net market borrowings
this year have thus amounted to Rs.68 crores, the sum for which credit was taken in
the budget.
46. Mention was made earlier of the decline in the receipts from small savings.
For some months the net receipts have been much smaller than in the past particularly
under Postal Savings Banks. In the first ten months of the current year the net receipts
10

amounted to Rs.37.6 crores against a sum of Rs.44.8 crores in the corresponding
period of last year. The deterioration is wholly due to a drop in the receipts from
Savings Banks which are Rs.14 crores less than in the previous year. In recent weeks
there has been a slight improvement and it is hoped that collections will increase
steadily in the future.
47. The intensification and development of the Small Savings movement have
been under the constant consideration of Government in consultation with the State
Governments who have now a predominant interest in the net proceeds from this
source. The House will remember that as part of the programme for attracting larger
investments the rate of interest on Postal Savings Banks was raised by 1/2 per cent and
the yield on the 12 Year National Plan Savings Certificates and Treasury Saving
Certificates was increased with effect from the 1st June 1957. Since then, the yield on
the 15 year annuities has also been raised to the same level as the yield on the 12 Year
National Plan Certificates. The increase in the yield has had a good effect on the sale
of Certificates bit the heavy withdrawals from Postal Savings Banks are somewhat
disquieting. The introduction of a scheme of recurring monthly deposits which will
assist persons with small regular incomes to accumulate savings for meeting expenditure
such as on the marriage and education of children is under consideration and it is
hoped to introduce this shortly.
48. The National Savings Organisation, in cooperation with State Governments,
has been making continuous efforts to improve collections of small savings. Internal
agents are being appointed in both Government and non-Government institutions for
securing regular investments from their fellow employees through organised savings
groups. The recent amendment of the Payment of Wages Act permitting voluntary
deduction at source for purposes of investments in small savings is likely to assist in
the mobilisation of savings in industrial establishments. State Governments are
undertaking intensive campaigns in the rural areas and special attention is being given
to the Community Project areas and National Extension Service blocks. The procedure
at Post Offices, through which the bulk of the small savings is collected, is also being
simplified wherever possible and a special Small Savings Board consisting of
representatives of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, the Accountant General, Posts
and Telegraphs, the Finance Ministry and the Reserve Bank of India has been constituted
for this purpose.
49. In the budget for the coming year credit has been taken for a net receipt
of Rs.125 crores from market borrowing and Rs.100 crores from small savings. Market
conditions in the last two or three months have been easier and If these continue, as
may be reasonably expected, the target of Rs.125 crores is likely to be reached. For
small savings although the net receipts this year have been disappointing, it may be
hoped that, with the more intensive development of the movement with the cooperation
of the States, the net collections next year will show a substantial improvement. As
mentioned earlier, foreign assistance next year is likely to amount to Rs.325 crores of
which Rs.40 crores will be by way of grants and the balance by way of loans.
11

50. The overall budgetary position next year may now be summarised. At the
existing level of taxation and expenditure there will be a revenue deficit of Rs.33
crores. Capital outlay will amount to Rs.412 crores, loans to State Governments and
others to Rs.362 crores, and debt repayments to Rs.28 crores. This total disbursement
of Rs.835 crores will be met to the extent of Rs.75 crores from repayments of loans by
State Governments and others, Rs.145 crores from market borrowings in India, Rs.100
crores by Small Savings, Rs.285 crores from foreign loans and Rs.25 crores from
miscellaneous receipts under debt and deposit heads, leaving a deficit of Rs.205 crores
which will be met by the issue of Treasury Bills.
51. On the basis of the above estimates the total amount of outstanding Treasury
Bills at the end of 1958-59 will be a little over Rs.1400 crores, the bulk of which will
be held by the Reserve Bank. The expansion of Treasury Bins has been not merely to
meet the internal requirements but also for the replacement of the external assets held
by the Reserve Bank, which have been drawn down mostly for development purposes
in the last two or three years. The Treasury Bills represent, something more than mere
floating short terms debt and will gradually be funded into loans of appropriate maturity.
52. I now turn to the proposals for dealing with the anticipated revenue deficit
of Rs.32.85 crores in the coming year.

PART B
53. Less than ten months ago Parliament approved proposals involving very
substantial additions to taxation of a magnitude rarely equalled in peace time. These
covered not merely the extension of existing taxes but the levy of new taxes such as
the tax on wealth and the tax on expenditure. All these measures resulted in a major
reorientation of the tax structure of the country. I do not propose to make any major
modification in it but to confine myself to making such improvements as are necessary
to make the present pattern of taxation an integrated one, and to plug any loopholes in
taxation.
DIRECT TAXATION
54. I shall first deal with direct taxation. My first proposal is to introduce a
tax on gifts which will fill a gap in the scheme of direct taxation and would not only
make evasion or avoidance difficult but also spread the tax burden more equitably.
55. The idea of a Gift Tax is not new. Many Honourable Members have stressed
both in this House and the other House the need for introducing such a measure at an
early date. The transfer of properties through gifts to one’s near relations or associates
is one of the commonest forms of avoidance of not only the Estate Duty but also of
Income-tax, Wealth Tax and even the Expenditure Tax. The only way of effectively
checking this practice is to levy a tax on gifts. Such a tax is already being levied in
other countries, for example, U.S.A., Canada, Japan and Australia. The Taxation Enquiry
12

Commission also had accepted the Gift Tax as theoretically an attractive proposition.
56. It is proposed to levy a tax on gifts by whomsoever made, the only
exceptions being charitable institutions, government companies, corporations
established by Central or State Acts and public companies whose affairs are controlled
by six persons or more. The tax will be levied on the donor on the value of all gifts
made by him during a year but for the purpose of determining the rate of duty, the
gifts made during the four years preceding the year will be aggregated. Such aggregation
will, of course, be made only in respect of gifts made after the date this tax comes into
force. Gifts upto a total value of Rs.10,000 in any one year will be exempt and if the
value of gifts made during any year exceeds this sum, only the excess will be subjected
to tax. This basic exemption of Rs.10,000 will be reduced to Rs.5,000 if gifts to any
one individual donee during a year exceeds Rs.3,000. In addition to this basic
exemption, there are other exemptions, important among which are:(a) gifts to Central and State Governments, Local Authorities and charitable
institutions:
(b) gifts to female dependants on the occasion of marriage upto Rs.10,000 in
each case;
(c) gifts to one’s wife upto a total limit of Rs.1 lakh;
(d) gifts to dependants of policies of insurance upto Rs.10,000 for each.
The rates of tax will be the same as for the Estate Duty, the only difference
being that the first slab of Rs.50,000 will not be exempted from the tax. The rates of
tax range from 4 per cent on the first slab to 40 per cent on gifts over Rs.50 lakhs. The
administrative set up and the procedure for assessment, appeal and collection of tax
will be the same as for income-tax, Wealth Tax and Expenditure Tax.
57. The main object of this tax is to plug a loophole in the other tax statutes.
Its importance cannot, therefore, be adequately measured in terms of the amount of
revenue it brings directly. We have no reliable data for making an estimate of the
yield, and on a rough guess the yield from the Gifts Tax has been placed at Rs.3
crores. A bill for the levy of this tax is being introduced separately.
58. My second proposal is to make certain amendments in the Estate Duty
Act. The actual collections of Estate Duty have fallen short of even the modest
expectation we had at the time of passing that measure. This is partly due to the
practice of making large gifts inter vivos which will, hereafter, be checked by the levy
of the Gift Tax. It is also partly due to the numerous concessions provided in the Act
itself, and I propose to reduce some of them. The important changes are:(a) The exemption limit will be reduced from Rs.1,00,000 to Rs.50,000.
(b) Only one-half of the probate duty or court fees paid on succession
certificates will be allowed as a deduction from estate duty instead of the
full amount as at present.
(c) Gifts to other than those for charitable purposes made within a period of
13

(d)

two years prior to death are now subjected to estate duty. It is proposed to
increase this period to five years, as recommended by the Taxation Enquiry
Commission. Gifts on which gift tax has been paid will not be taken into
account.
The value of coparcenery interest in Hindu Undivided Families will be
taxed at the rate applicable to the value of the estate of the branch of the
family concerned.

The effect of these changes will be to increase the revenue by Rs.50 lakhs
which will accrue wholly to the States.
59. Honourable Members are aware that the Estate Duty Act has departed
from the other fiscal statutes in vesting the appellate powers with the Central Board of
Revenue. Now that we have gained some experience in the working of this Act, it is
proposed to bring the appellate procedure in line with the provisions in the income
Tax, Wealth Tax and Expenditure Tax Acts. A bill amending the Estate Duty Act is
being introduced separately.
60. So far as income Tax is concerned, no major change in the rate structure
is proposed to be made. For the next financial year the basic rates of tax, together with
the special surcharges in operation for the current financial year, will continue. The
only change which I propose to make is in regard to the excess dividend super-tax
payable by Section 23A companies. At present, the excess dividend tax rates for all
companies are 10 per cent 20 per cent and 30 per cent on the slabs of dividends over
6 per cent, 10 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively, of capital. For the financial year
1958-59, I propose to fix the excess dividend tax rates for Section 23A companies
only in two slabs, 10 per cent on the slab of dividends over 6 per cent, of capital and
20 per cent on the slab over 10 per cent, of capital. This change is desirable as under
the Act these companies are required to distribute the whole or a large proportion of
their profits to the shareholders. It is not possible to estimate the loss of revenue in
this proposal, but it is likely to be very small.
61. I also propose to make a change in the substantive income-tax. law in
regard to “Development Rebate”. At present, this rebate is allowed uniformly at 25
per cent of the cost of the new machinery or plant and is available for ships as well.
While this, rate of 25 per cent is adequate for new plant and machinery in general, I
think some further concession is necessary for the shipping industry. I propose, therefore,
to increase the rate of development rebate for ships to 40 per cent Simultaneously, the
conditions for the grant of development rebate will be tightened as some instances of
abuse of this concession have come to notice.
62. In addition to these, the Finance Bill contains some amendments relating
to income-tax law, some of which are intended to check evasion while some others are
only of a clarificatory nature. To mention the more important of them, the definition
of ‘technician’ is proposed to be made stricter to ensure that the exemption is not
14

secured to a person who is not legitimately entitled to it. It is also proposed to confer
on the Central Board of Revenue the power to make rules laying down the basis for
valuing perquisites in kind, like rent-free quarters, free use of conveyance, etc., so that
some uniformity is secured in the basis of assessment.
63. Before leaving the subject of income-tax. I should like to mention a change
in regard to the exemption from tax of payments made to employees for leave passages.
Such exemption is now granted only, if the payments are made under certain rules,
framed by Government. This leads to a large volume of administrative work not
commensurate with the results and these rules are proposed to be withdrawn.
64. In regard to the Wealth Tax, the only change proposed is to exempt a
foreign citizen from payment of the tax on his foreign wealth, even though he may be
resident or ordinarily resident in India. This was the intention of the Select Committee
when the provisions of the Bill were discussed by them but the intention has not been
secured by the language of the provision as it now stands.
INDIRECT TAXATION
65. I now turn to the field of indirect taxation. In regard to Union Excise
Duties the only major change I propose is the increase in the rate of duty on Cement
from Rs.20 per ton to Rs.24 per ton. This increase will not, however, raise the issue
price of cement as it is proposed simultaneously to withdraw the surcharge at present
levied by the State Trading Corporation. The additional revenue of Rs.2.24 crores will
be utilised for road development.
66. Certain minor amendments, mainly of a clarificatory nature, are also being
made and I need not dilate on them here. I should, however, refer to two changes
which are being made immediately by notification. Firstly, for powerlooms producing
cotton textiles it is proposed that the concession of paying duty at compounded rates
should no longer be available to establishments having more than 100 looms.
Simultaneously, the compounded rates applicable to units having 25 to 100 powerlooms
are being suitably enhanced in two stages, This would bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.83 lakhs. Secondly, the rate of duty on vegetable products is being lowered for
the first 3000 tons cleared by each factory. This would give substantial relief to the
smaller producers and will cost the Exchequer Rs.24 lakhs per annum.
67. Coming to Customs Duties, only a few minor adjustments and verbal
changes are being made in the Tariff Schedule to remove some anomalies or doubts.
The only change of any significance is the introduction of the alternative ad valorem
rate of duty in respect of expensive varieties of artificial silk yarn, like nylon, perlon,
etc., so far as the other yarns, such as viscose, are concerned, the rate of duty is being
left unchanged. The financial effect of these changes will be negligible.
15

NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
68. The net effect of the taxation proposals may now be summarised. The tax
on gifts will bring in Rs.3 crores, the changes in the Estate Duty Rs.50 lakhs, the
increased duty on cement Rs.2.24 crores and the adjustments in the excise duty on
cloth Rs.83 lakhs, a total sum of Rs.6.57 crores, of which Rs.50 lakhs will accrue to
the States. The reduction in the excise duty on vegetable products will involve a loss
of Rs.24 lakhs leaving the net additional revenue at Rs.5.83 crores. This will leave a
final deficit of Rs.27.02 crores which I propose to leave uncovered.
CONCLUSION
69. The coming year, which will be the third year of the Plan, is bound to be
one of difficulty calling for a considerable measure of sacrifice on the part of everyone.
It is unnecessary to reiterate that the plan of development the country has set before
itself has to be implemented whatever the sacrifice that may be called for because
without economic development we cannot bring relief and prosperity to the millions
of our countrymen who have suffered for so long from the curse of poverty. The crisis
through which we are passing is a crisis of development,) a crisis of resources. We
must try to produce more, export more and save more to find the resources for
implementing the Plan. In the budget for the coming year we have set ourselves high
targets for both taxation and borrowing. I have no doubt in my mind that these targets
are not beyond our capacity provided there is a sense of discipline and a sense of
urgency in the country. I am sure the effort to realise the resources planned for the
coming year will be forthcoming.
70. We live in an age of revolutionary changes when the development of
science and technology has opened out vast avenues of human progress. We live also
at a time when a great part of the resources of the world are being directed to
preparations for war and the production of terrible weapons of mass destruction. While
space travel beckons to us and the vast expanses of the universe almost appear to be
in our reach, the horizon of our minds is limited by fear and the shadow of terrible
disaster hangs over us. How can we and others raise ourselves above fear and hatred
and the petty conflicts that are so out of place in the new world that is taking shape?
How can we in India function with courage and unity and grasp with strong hands and
stout hearts at this future? It has been given to us of this generation to face mighty
problems and to achieve great results. We can only serve our own people or the world
if we hold to our ideals and live up to them
71. This budget statement is a minor event in our march forward. We have to
look at it in the perspective of what we have to do and what we have to achieve,
Above all, we have to realise that our success depends on ourselves and not on others,
on our own strength and wisdom, on our unity and cooperation and on the spirit of our
people whom we are privileged to serve.
(February 28,1958)
16

