SPEECH OF SHRIMATI INDIRA GANDHI PRIME MINISTER AND
MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR
1970-71
Sir,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 1970-71. The annual Budget is the most
important instrument through which we implement our successive Plans for
development.
2.
Before I proceed to delineate the broad features of our present economic
situation and of the Budget, I should like to spell out briefly the main. ingredients of
Government’s approach.
3.
It is generally accepted that social, economic and political stability is not
possible without the growth of productive forces and the augmentation of national
wealth. Also, that such growth and increase in wealth cannot be sustained without due
regard to the welfare of the weaker sections of the community.
4.
Therefore, it is necessary to devise policies which reconcile the imperatives
of growth with concern for the well-being of the needy and the poor. Measures have
to be devised which, while providing welfare, also add momentum to productive forces.
Any severance of the vital link between the needs of growth and of distributive justice
will produce stagnation or instability. Both must be avoided.
5.
The provision of adequate employment opportunities is not just a welfare
measure. It is a necessary part of the strategy of development in a poor country which
can ill-afford to keep any resources unutilised or under-utilised. Greater attention to
dry farming areas is not merely to avoid inequalities in the rural areas. It is also an
essential part of any programme to achieve sustained increases in agricultural
production. Encouragement to small enterprises and to new entrepreneurs is vital to
build up managerial and entrepreneurial talent which is all too scarce today. Without
some restraint on urban land values and individual ownership of urban property, we
cannot adequately develop housing and other amenities necessary to wrest the maximum
benefit from the vast productive investments already made in our over-crowded towns
and cities. The weaker sections of the society are also the greatest source of potential
strength. We cannot provide for all the urgent needs of society with our limited
resources. But a balance has to be struck between outlays which may be immediately
productive and those which are essential to create and sustain a social and political
framework which is conducive to growth, in the long.
6.
Economic conditions in the country at present permit and indeed require
a more vigorous effort to stimulate growth. During 1969-70, the first year of the
1

Fourth Plan, there is every likely hood of achieving an over-all rate of growth of 5 to
51/2 per cent. The modernisation of Indian agriculture is well on its way; and it has led
to a substantial recovery in industrial production. There has been a welcome increase
in foreign exchange reserves; and the general level of prices over the past two years
has been relatively stable. At the same time, it is necessary to set up new capacity in
a number of fields in order to sustain growing levels of consumption, exports and
employment.
7.
If the opportunities for growth, which are now available, are to be seized
fully, the Central and State Governments must make adequate provision for
developmental outlays in the coming year. Private investment in agriculture, small
industry and construction has been buoyant for some time now; and there is a revival
of interest in investment in organised industry. A decisive increase in Plan outlay in
the public sector will also stimulate productive investment in the private sector.
8.
Apart from providing for a significantly higher Plan outlay, the Budget
for 1970-71 makes special provision for a number of schemes which combine an
element of social welfare with future growth potential.
9.
It is with this positive approach to problems of growth with stability and
social justice, that we have sought to give new emphasis and a new sense of urgency to
economic policy in recent months. The nationalisation of banks, for which there is
overwhelming support in this Honourable House and the country at large, will, I am
sure, be soon put on a stable footing. The Monopolies Act and the decisions that the
Government have already taken in the light of the recommendations of the Industrial
Licensing Policy Inquiry Committee should help to avoid the concentration of economic
power and provide encouragement to small and new entrepreneurs. At the same time,
well -established industrial companies will be able to participate in the core sector and
in industries with export orientation. It has also been decided that Government as well
as financial institutions should assume special responsibility to promote industrial
development in selected backward areas. The Fourth Plan, as it is now being revised,
will take particular care to look after some of the urgent socio-economic requirements,
such as the development of suitable techniques for dry farming areas, greater employment
opportunities for landless labour, the adequate supply of drinking water and the
improvement of urban environment in many of our congested metropolitan areas.
10. According to Revised Estimates, the deficit at the Centre for 1969-70 is
now estimated to be Rs.290 crores as against the Budget Estimates of Rs.254 crores.
The transfer to State Governments, on account of their share in Central taxes and
duties, has increased by Rs.104 crores over the Budget Estimates, largely as a result
of the Finance Commission’s award. A substantial provision of Rs.275 crores by way
of non-Plan assistance to the States had also to be made so as to enable them to carry
out their Plan programmes. As a result of continued decline in imports, collection
2

under import duties and disbursements under external aid are not likely to come up to
Budget Estimates. On the other hand, collections under income-tax and non-tax revenues
and receipts from market loans will be larger.
11. Since several States continue to have gaps in resources, it would be prudent
to provide in advance for special assistance to them. Accordingly, it is proposed to
provide Rs. 175 crores in the Budget next year to cover the gaps in the resources of
certain States since otherwise it would be difficult for them to undertake worthwhile
Plan programmes. Provision for Plan assistance to the States is also being increased
from Rs.615 crores this year to Rs.635 crores next year. If State Governments are able
to raise additional resources and keep a careful watch on non-Plan expenditure, it should
be possible for them to increase their Plan outlay from roughly Rs.950 crores this year
to about Rs.115 0 crores next year, i. e. an increase of the order of 2 0 per cent.
12. It is proposed to raise Central Plan outlays, including those on centrally
sponsored schemes from Rs.1223 crores this year to Rs.1411 crores next year, i. e. by
roughly 15 per cent. The Centre’s Plan next year provides Rs.39 crores more for
agriculture and allied programmes, Rs.84 crores more for transport and communications,
Rs.31 crores more for power and Rs.28 crores more for social services, including
family planning. The Plan outlay of the Union Territories is also being augmented
from Rs.66 crores to Rs.76 crores.
13. Taking the Centre, States and the Union Territories together, the Plan
outlay will increase from Rs.2239 crores in 1969-70 to Rs.2637 crores in 1970-71 i e.
by about Rs.400 crores. At this stage, this represents a substantial effort to accelerate
the pace of development. In addition to the Plan provisions made in the Budget,
institutional finance to assist industry and agriculture will also be mobilised on a
larger scale next year. With the considerable step up in Plan outlay and the increased
provision of institutional finance, there should be significant increase in employment
opportunities in the coming year.
14. Programmes of rural development which will be given special emphasis,
with the help of Plan provisions and Institutional. Finance, are summarised in a
memorandum which is being separately circulated to Honourable Members. This
memorandum also outlines some of the new initiatives which we propose to take in
order to combine growth with a greater regard for the welfare of the most needy
sections of society. I shall, therefore, refer to them only briefly here.
(a)

Special schemes for small farmers are being taken up in 45 districts and
research on dry farming techniques is being accelerated.

(b)

It is proposed to provide next year a sum of Rs.25 crores for selected rural
works programmes particularly in areas which are prone to famine. This
provision will be outside the Plan and will form part of the amount set
aside for drought relief during the year.
3

(c)

An Urban Development Corporation with an authorised share capital of
Rs.10 crores is being set up. The Corporation will borrow in the market to
supplement its share capital and to set up a revolving fund for financing
activities, such as slum clearance, housing and urban land development.

(d)

A substantial provision has been made in the Fourth Plan for the supply of
drinking water. I have written to the Chief Ministers that the bulk of this
provision should be used to provide drinking water to those areas which
have no easy access to this basic requirement rather than to improve
existing facilities in bigger towns.
To provide more comprehensive benefits to industrial workers, who are
liable to pay contribution to the Employees Provident Fund at the rate of
8 per cent of their pay, it is proposed that a part of the contribution of
employers and employees should be supplemented by a contribution from
the Government to make up a separate fund from which family pensions
as well as a lump sum payment in the event of death will be provided.

(f)

The minimum pension as also family pension for Central Government
employees is proposed to be increased to Rs.40 per month. This decision
will apply to those receiving’ pension at present as well as to those entitled
to pensions in future. For industrial employees also, the scheme, to which
I referred earlier, provides for a minimum family pension of Rs.40 per
month.

(g)

To supplement existing schemes for school-feeding and the like, a
beginning is being made with a programme to meet the nutritional
requirements of the age group 0-3. A provision of Rs.4 crores is being
made in the Budget for children in tribal development blocks and in city
slums. From time to time, the programme will be extended with the help
of specially designed schemes to raise additional resources.

15. At the existing rates of taxation, revenue receipts are likely to increase
from Rs.3587 crores this year to Rs.3867 crores next year. After allowing for statutory
transfer to the States, the revenue receipts available to the Centre will increase from
Rs.2965 crores to Rs.3167 crores. Revenue expenditure next year is expected to increase
by Rs.176 crores, of which Rs.68 crores is on Plan schemes and Rs.108 crores on nonPlan items. Total non-Plan expenditure has been restricted to the minimum and will
increase by about 4 per cent.
16. Honourable Members will also be glad to note that the internal resources
of public sector enterprises, which are available for their expansion, will increase
from Rs.162 crores this year to Rs.2 02 crores next year. Market loans are estimated
at Rs.162 crores next year as against Rs.141 crores in the current year. Receipts under
PL 480 and other food aid, including some on revenue account, are expected to decline
4

from Rs.239 crores this year to Rs.161 crores in 1970-71. Receipts under other aid
should be more or less of the same order as this year. Taking account of all other
items, including the provision for the Plan and for special assistance to the States
outside the Plan, the capital account will show a deficit of Rs.365 crores. The revenue
account is expected to show a marginal surplus of Rs.15 crores.
17. With growing prosperity in rural areas, it has become all the more important
to tap rural savings for further development. Schemes to mobilise savings for a specific
purpose are likely to have greater appeal. A model scheme of debentures to be issued
by State, sponsored institutions has, therefore, been prepared and it is hoped that rural
debentures, floated in accordance with the scheme, will be an additional instrument
for the orderly mobilisation of rural savings. The extension of banking to rural areas
will serve the same purpose. Even today, our postal system extends to many areas
which cannot be- covered by banks in the near future. The postal system, therefore,
also needs to be harnessed for greater mobilisation of savings. At present our small
savings schemes, including Post Office Savings Bank accounts, otter facilities for
savings with a number of tax concessions. These tax concessions, however, are not of
much interest to the rural population or to low income groups, which by and large, are
not subject to taxation of income. To these groups, a higher rate of interest would be
more attractive than a lower rate with corresponding tax Concessions. Accordingly, it
is proposed to introduce a new series of time deposits, recurring deposits and savings
certificates, which will carry higher rates of interest without any special tax concessions.
The present tax-free facilities will also be continued with slightly higher rates of
interest. The rates of interest on contributions to the General Provident Fund and the
Public Provident Fund are also being enhanced slightly. I shall have occasion later to
refer to some changes in our direct tax structure, which are designed to promote
higher savings. A memorandum giving the full details of all these changes is being
separately circulated.

PART ‘B’
18. The expenditure proposals for 1970-71 which I have just presented have
been aimed at stimulating growth while providing for some measures of social welfare
for the less privileged sections of the community. The same considerations of growth
with social justice must govern the manner in which resources are raised to meet the
requirements of Government.
19. In a country like India, where Government assumes the major part of the
responsibility for the promotion of capital formation, the Government Budget should
yield a substantial revenue surplus to take care of a part of the needs on capital
account. This is all the more so at a time when net receipts under foreign aid and
5

concessional imports of food grains are declining in keeping with our objective of
achieving self-reliance in the shortest possible time. At existing rates of taxation, the
revenue account for 1976-71 will yield only a nominal surplus. The ratio of taxation
to national income in India is among the lowest in the world and over the recent past
it has declined from the level of a little over 14 per cent which was already reached in
1965-66. There is thus need to enlarge the tax base, so as to meet adequately the
continuing requirements of growth and social welfare.
20. In enlarging the tax base, our first concern must be to ensure that the
taxes which are already levied are not avoided or evaded by devices which just manage
to keep on the right side of the law. Accordingly, I have tried to plug some major
loopholes in our tax system and to withdraw some of the concessions which have
outlived their utility. Taxation is also a major instrument in all-modern societies to
achieve greater equality of incomes and wealth. It is, therefore, proposed to make our
direct tax system serve this purpose by increasing income taxation at the higher levels
as well as by substantially enhancing the present rates of taxation on wealth and gifts.
Because of the urgent need to restrain speculative increases in urban land values and
individual holdings of urban property, the taxation of urban land and buildings is
being substantially increased. At the same time, the concessions available at present to
stimulate savings are being rationalised, so as to make them more effective. Some
marginal relief in direct taxation is also proposed for low income groups. In keeping
with the need to stimulate higher production and investment, no significant change in
corporate taxation is proposed.
21. Nearly 75 per cent of Central tax revenues are derived from indirect
taxation, i.e. from customs and excise duties. Any attempt to impart greater strength to
the fiscal system, therefore, cannot disregard the scope for increase in indirect taxation.
The proposals in this field are designed primarily to raise additional resources in a
manner which helps our progress towards self reliance and restrains the consumption
of certain commodities. Such restraint is necessary from the economic or the social
point of view. By and large, the additional taxation of investment goods or producer
goods has been avoided and the bulk of the increase is in respect of final consumer
goods. Wherever it has been necessary to touch items of common consumption, an
attempt has been made to safeguard the consumption of the poorer sections of the
community to the maximum extent possible.
DIRECT TAXATION
22. The marginal rates of income taxation will be increased progressively m
all personal incomes above Rs.40,000 per year. With the addition of the surcharge at
10 per cent, the maximum rate of 93.5 per cent will now be reached in the slab over
its. 2 lakhs as against 82.5 per cent, in the slab over Rs.2.21 lakhs at present.
23. Simultaneously, the existing rates of ordinary wealth tax are being,
enhanced. At present, these rates vary from 0.5 per cent to 3 per cent. They will now
6

vary from 1 per cent at the lowest slab to 5 per cent at the highest slab. For the
individual, who derives his entire income from wealth, the combined effect of income
and wealth taxation, as now proposed, will impose an effective ceiling on income
after tax, when such income reaches approximately Rs.25,000 per annum. On the
other hand, there will be an inbuilt incentive in favour of earned incomes. When
income is wholly earned, for example, there will be no absolute ceiling, as the highest
marginal tax of 93.5 per cent will leave some room for increase in income after tax at
all levels.
24. Honourable Members are aware that we are at present examining practical
means of imposing a ceiling on urban property. While the legal and other aspects of
the matter are being examined, it is proposed to increase the additional wealth tax on
urban lands and buildings, so that the objective of a ceiling on urban property is
achieved, at least in part, within the framework of the powers already available to the
Centre. At present, the additional wealth tax on urban lands and buildings is leviable,
in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families, on the value of lands and
buildings situated in cities and towns with a population exceeding one lakh and with
an initial exemption ranging from Rs.4 to Rs.7 lakhs in different categories of cities.
The tax is leviable on the balance at rates ranging from 1 per cent to 4 per cent. The
maximum rate is reached when the value of urban lands and buildings exceeds Rs.19
to R s.22 lakhs. It is now proposed to levy a tax of 5 per cent on the value of urban
lands and buildings in excess of Rs.5 lakhs and at the rate of 7 per cent on the value
in excess of Rs.10 lakhs. No distinction will be made in regard to the exemption on
the basis of the population of the area, in which the properties are situated. The
definition. of an urban area is also being enlarged to include areas within the limits of
any municipality or other similar authority having a population of 10, 000 or more,
with powers to cover by notification areas upto 8 kilometres outside such limits.
Business premises will continue to be excluded from the proposed levy as at present.
However, guest houses maintained by those liable to pay this tax will not be reckoned
as business premises. Provisions are also being made to prevent avoidance of the tax
by transfer, from individual or joint Hindu family ownership, to ownership by
partnership firms, associations of persons and closely-held companies. Another measure
which is intended to serve a similar purpose, provides for the taxation of capital gains
arising from the sale or transfer of agricultural land situated within urban areas.
25. One of the major devices leading to tax evasion and avoidance is the
creation of private trusts. At present discretionary trusts are taxed on their income and
wealth at the rates applicable to individuals. These lower rates lead to the proliferation
of such trusts. It is proposed that in future, discretionary trusts would be taxed at a flat
rate of 65 per cent on their incomes and 1.5 per cent on their wealth or at the rates
applicable in the case of individuals, whichever is higher. Provision is, however, being
made for exemption from these flat rates for certain categories of existing discretionary
trusts.
7

26. In the case of charitable and religious trusts, exemption from tax would
be allowed only in respect of income actually, applied to the purposes of the trust in
the same year, or within three months of the close of the year. Further, the exemption
will be forfeited altogether if the trust funds, constituting its corpus or income, are
invested in a concern in which The author or founder of the trust or any of his relatives
is substantially interested and the amount of the investment exceeds 5 per cent of the
capital of that concern. These provisions will curb the use of the funds of charitable
and religious trusts to acquire control over industry and business. Some changes are
also being made to prevent indirect benefits being enjoyed by the authors or founders
of such trusts. On the, other hand, the present complete exemption from tax, which
applies to Universities and other educational institutions, will also be applied in the
case of hospitals and other similar institutions.
27. At present, one residential house is exempted from wealth tax, irrespective
of its value, if it is situated in a place with a population not exceeding 10,000. For
houses situated in larger towns, the monetary limit for exemption is Rs.1 lakh. The
monetary limit of Rs.1 lakh will now be applied uniformly irrespective of the location
of the residential house.
28. The rates of gift tax are also being revised to bring them more in line with
the rates of estate duty and the present exemption limit of Rs.10,000 in respect of gifts
made during a year is being lowered to Rs.5,000.
29. Those who are united in Heaven should not be put asunder by a mere tax
collector. On this view, the income and wealth of husband, wife and minor children
should be aggregated for purposes of income and wealth taxation. But in matters like
this, enforced unity sometimes leads to sharper division. It is, therefore, proposed to
examine the matter in greater detail and to bring forward the necessary legislation
subsequently, giving opportunity for discussion in this House and outside.
30. At present, income upto Rs.1,000 from investment in the Unit Trust and
upto another Rs.1,000 of dividends an shares in Indian companies as well as the
whole of the interest earned on a number of small savings schemes and Post Office
savings accounts is exempt from income tax. There is no reason why a distinction
should be made between such investments, and investments in other financial assets,
such as securities of the Central or State Governments, approved rural debentures,
deposits in banking companies, cooperative banks and land mortgage or land
development banks and the new small savings scheme and Post Office deposit accounts
which are not to enjoy any special tax concessions. It is, therefore, proposed that
income upto Rs. 3,000 will be exempt from income tax, provided it is derived from
investments in Unit Trust or shares in Indian companies or any of the other categories
which I have just mentioned. The exemption in respect of small savings schemes and
Post Office savings accounts, where special tax concessions are available, will continue
to be available additionally.
8

31. Similarly, it is proposed that, apart from the present general exemption of
Rs.1 lakh in the case of individuals and Rs.2 lakhs in the case of Hindu undivided
families and a residential house upto the value of R s. 1 lakh, investments in a wide
variety of financial assets upto a total of R s. 1.5 lakhs will be exempt from wealth
tax. Even today, investments in specified small savings certificates, Post Office savings
accounts and five-year fixed deposits with the Central Government are exempt from
wealth tax and any one who takes the maximum advantage of these provisions can
claim exemption upto Rs.1.2 lakhs. The enlarged limit of Rs.1.5 lakhs will now include
investments in the Unit Trust, shares of Indian companies, securities of the Central or
State Governments, approved rural debentures, the new small savings schemes and
Post Office deposit accounts and deposits in banking companies, cooperative banks
and land mortgage or development banks.
32. Or the other hand, in view of these generalised provisions to encourage
savings, there is no reason to continue the scheme of tax credit certificates in respect
of investments in new equity issues. These will accordingly be discontinued in relation
to new equity issues after 31st March 1970. Existing concessions regarding
contributions to life insurance, provident funds, etc., will continue.
33. Suggestions have been made, from time to time, that the exemption limit
for income tax should be raised as a measure of relief to lower income groups and in
the interest of better tax administration. It has been urged that by removing a large
number of small assesses from the scope of income taxation, Income-tax Officers will
have more time to devote to larger cases where the gain to revenue would be
correspondingly greater. In a poor country like ours, the present exemption limit which
varies from Rs.4,000 to Rs.4,800 in accordance with the number of dependents, cannot
be considered unreasonably low in relation to the average level of income in the
country. At the same time, there is considerable force in the argument that tax
administration would improve if income tax authorities did not have to devote so
much time to smaller cases. Faced with this dilemma, I have decided to appeal to the
higher court of family planning, and I propose to do away with the present system
where exemption is related to the number of dependents. In future, a uniform exemption
limit of Rs.5,000 will apply in the case of all non-corporate assesses irrespective of
whether they are married or have any children. This will make for greater administrative
simplicity and give a small benefit to all income tax-payers. The relief will be naturally
greater for those who continue to seek relief from matrimony or parenthood as well.
The change in respect of the exemption limit would involve some loss of revenue. But
I have taken no debit for it as it should be more than offset by the improvement in tax
administration resulting from greater concentration on cases involving the bigger
assesses.
34. It is also proposed to provide a minimum deduction of Rs.20 per month in
lieu of the cost of travel to work to all salaried assesses. At present, deductions ranging
from Rs.5 per month to Rs.250 per month are permissible for people who travel to
9

work on a bicycle, motor-cycle, scooter, moped or a motor car. The deduction of
Rs.20 per month would be available to those who travel to work on a bicycle or by
public conveyance or by any other mode. At the same time, the higher deduction of
Rs.250 per month for a motor par which is applicable to higher income groups is
being reduced to Rs.200 per month, as there is no reason why those who presumably
own a more expensive car should be given a larger deduction. On balance, the revenue
loss from travel concession to the lower income groups would be met by the
corresponding gain from the reduction in the concession to the higher income group.
35. It has been decided to leave the present structure of corporate taxation
more or less alone in the interest of maintaining a stable climate for investment
decisions. The only significant change is that all entertainment expenditure incurred
in India in business and. the professions will now be disallowed in computing profits.
Similarly, expenditure on guesthouses, other than holiday homes for the benefit of
employees on leave, will be disallowed. Those who enjoy the hospitality of their
business friends should now no longer find their sense of gratitude diminished by the
thought that a part of the hospitality is really paid for by the Exchequer.
36. The combined effect of the increases in direct taxation in a full year
would be a gain to revenue of Rs. 36 crores. In fact, when the measures to plug
loopholes such as the revised procedure for the taxation of trusts become fully effective,
the revenue gain will be substantially larger. The additional revenue from wealth tax
will become available only in 1971-72. The additional revenue from income tax also
will be available only in part during 1970-71 by way of advance tax and deductions at
source. Thus, despite the substantial measures of additional direct taxation, the net
addition to the Centre’s resources from these changes in 1970-71 would be RS.5
crores only. But it will rise to Rs.23 crores in 1971-72. The States will gain to the
extent of Rs.10 crores in 1970-71 and Rs.13 crores in 1971-72.
INDIRECT TAXATION
37. Turning now to indirect taxation, it is proposed to abolish or reduce export
duties on a number of items so as to maintain their competitive position in world
markets. The duty on jute canvas, jute webbings, jute tarpaulin cloth and manufactures
thereof is being reduced from its. 500 to Rs.200 per metric tonne. The most important
change relates to tea, where the export duty is being abolished altogether. At the same
time, the excise duty on loose as well as package teas is being raised with the provision
for ad hoe rebate on exports at rates varying with the price of exported tea. On balance,
the duty burden on the export of all teas will be reduced with a margin in favour of
teas fetching a higher value so as to encourage the export of quality teas. The export
duty reductions will mean a loss in revenue of Rs.9.75 crores.
38. In order to give impetus to import substitution, the import duty on
machinery is being raised from 271/2 per cent to 35 per cent ad valorem. This increase,
however, will not apply to the machinery which is required for the initial setting up of
10

projects, or for substantial expansion of existing projects, whether in the public or the
private sector. The import duty on ‘ motor vehicle parts, pharmaceutical chemicals
and non-electrical instruments, apparatus and appliances will be increased by 10 per
cent ad valorem. The duty on certain plastic material and nichrome and other electrical
resistance wires will be raised from 60 per cent to 100 per cent ad valorem.
39. There is a proposal regarding customs duties which is intended neither to
replace imports by domestic production nor to produce revenue. In order to curb
conspicuous consumption and as a modest gesture of personal, if not political,
reconciliation, I propose to increase the duty on whisky, brandy, gin and wines.
40. Inclusive of additional duties corresponding to the changes in excise duties
to which I will soon turn, the additional revenue from, import duties will amount to
Rs.29.75 crores. Thus, the net gain in customs revenue after adjusting the export duty
loss will be Rs.20,00 crores.
41. It has often been suggested that the scope for excise taxation should be
widened to include taxation at a low rate of about 10 per cent on practically the whole
range of manufactured products. Without going that far, it is proposed to levy a 10 per
cent ad valorem excise duty on a number of new items including office machines, metal
containers, sparking plugs, stainless steel blades, slotted angles, iron safes and safe
deposit vaults. The levy on office machines will cover items like typewriters, calculating
machines, cash registers, cheque-writing machines, computers and intercom devices.
The duty on metal containers will be confined to those intended for the packaging of
goods for sale, including, casks, drums, cans, gas cylinders and rigid containers. The
additional revenue from these new duties will amount to Rs.10. 40 crores.
42. Similarly, among chemical products, duty at the rate of 10 per cent ad
valorem will now be levied on calcium carbide, bleaching powder and sodium
hydrosulphite and the present duty of 5 per cent on soda ash and caustic soda will be
raised to 10 per cent. An excise duty of Rs.300 per metric tonne is also being levied
on synthetic rubber. These changes will bring in an additional revenue of Rs.5.30
crores.
43. A 10 per cent ad valorem duty was levied last year on prepared and
preserved foods. The scope of the duty was, however, limited by notification to
preserved and canned fruits, jams, jellies, fruit juices, squashes and certain meat
products. I propose now to remove the bias against fruits and meat by extending the
scope of the levy to include products such as vegetable juices, synthetic syrups and
sherbets, de-hydrated peas, malted foods, instant coffee, instant - tea, jelly crystals,
custard and ice-cream powders, biscuits, cocoapowder, drinking chocolate, pasteurised
butter, processed cheese, branded aerated waters, glucose and dextrose. I hope
Honourable Members will not accuse me of having preferences of my own as. even
under my proposals. aerated waters, biscuits, butter and cheese will be taxed only
when manufactured with the aid of power and there will be total exemption from tax
11

for baby foods and branded ‘deshi’ ghee. These proposals will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.8. 68 crores.
44. The duty on sanitary ware and glazed tiles of porcelain will be raised
from 15 per cent and 10 per cent respectively to 25 per cent. The duty on room air conditioners will be raised from 40 per cent to 53-1/3 per cent and a similar increase
is also being made in respect of larger refrigerators with a capacity exceeding 165
litres. The duty on parts of refrigerators, air-conditioning plants and machinery is also
being raised from 53-1/3 per cent to 66-2/3 percent. Components and machinery
required for cold storage plants, air-conditioning of hospitals run by Government,
local bodies and public trusts, as well as factory establishments will, however, be
exempted from the scope of the increase. It will be seen that small size refrigerators
will not be affected. I propose, very reluctantly, to withdraw the exemption in favour
of television sets and impose a duty of 20 per cent ad valorem. The gain to revenue
from these measures will be Rs.2.24 crores.
45. In the case of aluminium, the existing specific duties are being replaced
by ad valorem duties. With a certain degree of rationalisation, this will produce an
additional revenue of Rs.4.70 crores. The duty on rigid plastic boards and unsupported
P.V. C. sheets is also being rationalised by transferring the incidence to the end product
and this will yield an additional revenue of Rs.96 lakhs.
46. It is proposed to increase the basic excise duty on polyester fibre of 2
deniers or less from Rs.21 to Rs.25 per kilogram with a corresponding increase in
special excise duty. The present nominal duty of 7. 8 paise per sq. metre on artificial
silk fabrics which include rayon, nylon, terylene, terycot and terywool fabrics is being
replaced by ad valorem duty ranging from 3 per cent to 10 per cent. The duty will vary
according to the value of the fabric and in the case of the cheaper varieties, whose
wholesale price is less than Rs.2.50 per sq. metre, there will in fact be some relief as
compared to the present position. I propose to make no change in relation to cotton
fabrics with the exception of a minor measure of rationalisation, whereby certain
fabrics at present taxed at specific rates, win be subjected to ad valorem levy. The
proposals on synthetic fibre and artificial silk fabrics will yield an additional revenue
of Rs.13. 78 crores.
47. The demand for petroleum products has been increasing very rapidly and
it is necessary to exercise some restraint in the interest of saving valuable foreign
exchange. It is also necessary to curtail the adulteration of diesel oil by kerosene,
which has assumed substantial proportions, and to discourage the use of furnace oil as
a substitute for other fuels such as coal. Accordingly, the duty on motor spirit is
proposed to be, increased by 10 paise per litre, on superior kerosene by 2 paise per
litre and on furnance oil by 2 paise per litre. The additional excise duty on these three
items will yield a revenue of Rs.39.56 crores of which Rs.21.36 crores will be in
respect of motor spirit and Rs.9.2 crores in respect of kerosene. The increase in the
duty on furnace oil will not apply to such oil used in coastal shipping and for electricity
12

generation and there will be no change in the dity on inferior kerosene. Honourable
Members will also note that the increase in the price of superior kerosene will be only
modest, i.e., 3.5 per cent.
48. I am sorry that the smoker’s pocket has to be touched once again. The
duty on cigarettes is being enhanced with the increase ranging from 3 per cent to 22
per cent ad valorem depending on the value slabs. The cheaper varieties of cigarettes
will go up by only one or two paise per packet of 10 cigarettes. Assuming that the
smoking community remains steadfast in its devotion, the additional revenue from
this measure will be Rs.13. 50 crores.
49. As already mentioned, the excise duty on tea is being raised in order to
release larger quantities for export particularly of quality teas. There will be no increase
in the duty on loose tea produced in zone one and only a marginal increase of 10 paise
per kilo on teas produced in zone two. For other zones, the increase varies from 45
paise to one rupee per kilo. After allowing for the rebate on export, there will be an
additional revenue of Rs.7. 87 crores which will be more than offset by the loss in
revenue from the abolition of the export duty on tea.
50. A uniform duty of 23 per cent ad valorem was levied last year on both
levy sugar and free market sugar. Prices of sugar in the free market have declined
substantially since then. Accordingly, it is proposed to increase the duty on free market
sugar from the present level of 23 per cent to 371/2 per cent ad valorem. In the case of
levy sugar, which accounts for 70 per cent of the total, there would only be a marginal
rounding off of the present rate from 23 per cent to 25 per cent. In line with the step
up on free sugar, though not to the same extent, the tariff rate of duty on khandsari
sugar is being increased from 121/2 per cent to 171/2 per cent. But as far as the rates
under the compounded levy system are concerned, which most of the producers elect
to adopt, there will be a reduction on the present rates which are being revised keeping
in view the fall in prices. The net additional revenue from sugar is estimated at about
Rs.28. 50 crores.
51. There are also a number of changes proposed in the excise duty structure
by way of rationalisation, simplification or clarification of the present position. The
statutory rate of duty on tin plates, for example, is being raised from Rs.375 to Rs.400
per metric tonne, in order to remove the present anomaly of the indigenous tin plates
paying a higher cumulative duty than the additional duty borne by imported tin plates.
The excise duty on paints and varnishes manufactured by units not employing power
will be wholly exempted as also the duty on fertilizer mixtures made out of fertilizers
which have already paid duty irrespective of whether such mixtures are produced by
power or not. Some relief, is also being accorded in the case of strawboards and
millboards by revising the excise duty exemption at certain levels of production. These
measures of relief in excise duties will involve a loss in revenue of Rs.43 lakhs.
Certain enabling provisions of the Finance Act 1969 are also being continued.
13

52. The total effect of all these proposals relating to excise duties will be an
additional revenue gain of about Rs.135 crores, of which Rs.100 crores will accrue to
the Centre and Rs.35 crores will be the share of the States and Union Territories.
POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS
53. The Posts and Telegraphs Department is likely to be in deficit next year
also. Accordingly, postal, telegraph and telephone tariffs will be revised to some extent
from dates to be notified. These revisions are outlined in a memorandum being
circulated with the Budget papers. Briefly, there will be some increase in postal tariffs
in respect of parcels, registration fee, despatch of value payable articles, money order
commission, supplementary fee for telegraphic money orders and book, pattern and
sample packets. Phonograms and Greetings telegrams win cost a little more. Charges
for telephone calls beyond the first 750 ‘calls in a quarter will increase from 15 paise
to 20 paise per call. Honourable Members will note that services such as post cards
and inland letter cards, which are generally used by common people, are not being
touched; in the case of money orders also no increase is being made upto Rs.100. The
proposed changes will yield Rs.8. 22 crores in a full year and would leave for next
year a surplus of Rs.1 crore after meeting the anticipated revenue deficit. The effect of
these changes has been accounted for in reckoning the total internal resources of
public undertakings.
SUMMING UP
54. To sum up, the measures for the additional taxation proposed will yield
a total, revenue of about Rs.170 crores in 1970-71 of which Rs.125 crores will
accrue to the Centre and.Rs.45 crores to the States. In subsequent years, when the
full effects of the changes in direct taxation will be felt, the gain to Central and
State revenues would be larger even without allowing for the normal growth factor.
As a result, the budgetary gap at the Centre next year will be of the order of Rs.225
crores as against the Revised Estimate of Rs.290 crores for the current year. In view
of the recent upward pressure on prices and the substantial increase in money supply
over the past year, some reduction in deficit financing is clearly desirable. At the
same time, a deficit of the order of Rs.225 crores should not cause concern in view
of the present favourable supply conditions in regard to food grains. The Reserve
Bank has already taken a number of steps recently to control credit; and with
continued vigilance in this regard, the deficit in the Government Budget now proposed
should pose no threat to the general stability of prices. The Central Budget has
provided adequately for the Plans of the States not only by increasing Plan assistance
and by providing for substantial non-Plan assistance but also by raising additional
resources in a manner which would bring considerable gains to the revenues of
State Governments. I hope that against this background, the States will be able to
look after their Plan and non-Plan needs without recourse to unauthorised overdrafts
from the Reserve Bank.
14

55. Sir, before I conclude, I should like to say that in presenting my first
Budget to this Honourable House, I have become acutely aware of the challenges as
well as the constraints of the contemporary-epoch of development of our national
economy. ‘ At the very beginning of my speech, I endeavoured to set out the broad
framework within which this Budget is cast. That framework, I believe, is consistent
with the political, economic and social realities of our country. Convinced as I am of
its essential soundness, there is no alternative but to tread a difficult but determined
course. If the opportunities for growth which are so much in evidence are to be seized
fully, no effort must be spared in raising resources for the purpose. To flinch from this
effort at this stage would be to impose even heavier burdens in the years to come. If
we allow the present momentum of growth to wane for the sake of some purely
temporary advantage, we will deny ourselves the cumulative benefits of a higher rate
of growth for all time to come. If the requirements of growth are urgent, so is the need
for some selective measures of social welfare. The fiscal system has also to serve the
ends of greater equality of Incomes, consumption and wealth, irrespective of any
immediate need for resources. At the same time, the needs of these sectors of our
economy which require private Initiative and Investment must also be kept in mind in
the interest of the growth of the economy as a whole. I can only hope that the proposals
I have just presented steer clear of the opposite dangers of venturing too little or
attempting too much. Thank you.
(February 28, 1970)

15

