SPEECH OF SHRI C.D. DESHMUKH, MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1952-53 (Final)
Sir, I deem it a great privilege to present this budget to the first Parliament elected
under the Constitution.
2.
As Honourable Members are aware, a budget for the current year was
presented to the Provisional Parliament last February as usual and a vote on account
was obtained from that Parliament to enable the Government to be carried on for the
first four months of the current year. A Finance Act was also passed by that Parliament
continuing, during the current year, the taxes in force when the budget was presented. I
then mentioned that the budget as then presented will be presented again to the new
Parliament with such changes as may be considered necessary by the new Government.
3.
The usual factual information contained in the budget speech was embodied
in a White Paper which was circulated with the budget last February. I am having this
White Paper and the speech I then made circulated to Honourable Members. I do not
propose to go over the whole ground covered by this White Paper and I shall only deal
with the further changes that have taken place since I presented the budget to the
provisional Parliament.
4.
In my speech last February I mentioned, as a welcome development in the
country’s economy, the steady drop in prices which had been taking place from July
1951 onwards. At the end of January 1952 the general index number of wholesale
prices stood at 430.3, a drop of nearly six per cent from the peak figure of 457.5 reached
in April 1951. Between January and March there was a more pronounced fall in the
index number, which dropped to 364.9 points i.e. by a further fourteen per cent by the
middle of March. Since then there has been a slight upward movement and the index
number for the week ended the third May stands at 369.8 points which may be compared
with 301.4, 367.2, and 393.3, the corresponding index numbers for August 1947, May
1948 and May 1950 respectively.
5.
This general fall in prices has, as I had occasion to explain more than once
in the debate following the budget, not been confined to any particular commodity
although in the case of some of them the drop has been rather abrupt. It has been largely
due to the disappearance of several international factors which led to an artificial rise in
prices since June 1950, the impact of the monetary and credit policy adopted by
Government to cheek inflation and the improvement in the general internal supply
position as a result of increased Production and larger imports. The fall in prices in the
case of certain commodities has, however, been sharper than these factors warranted,
but this is mainly because of speculative overtrading which had led to an artificial
1

increase in recent months in the prices of these commodities. On the whole, the drop in
the price level in recent months has been beneficial to the country’s economy, although
the readjustment necessitated by lack of accord between costs and prices is bound to
cause some unavoidable difficulties to those engaged in business. In their own interest
they must now decide to cut their losses reasonably and concentrate on economy and
efficiency of production.
6.
Honourable Members are, aware of the measures taken by Government
from time to time to meet the situation created by the abruptness of the fall in prices
with particular reference to its effect on the country’s export earnings. The export duty
on hessian was reduced last February from Rs.1,500 per ton to Rs.750 per ton and was
further reduced a few days ago, as s imply a revenue duty, to Rs.275 per ton. The duty
on sacking was also similarly reduced from Rs.350 per ton to Rs.175 per ton. Export
duties on raw cotton and cotton waste have also been reduced, while the duties on wool
and groundnut oil and some oil seeds have been abolished. Licensing restrictions on the
export of jute goods have been almost completely withdrawn. In the case of cotton
textiles, in which there has been, as in the other exporting countries in the world, a
sharp reversal of the relative strength of demand and supply, distribution controls have
been relaxed and mills have been allowed freely to sell the entire production of fine and
super-fine cloth and 80 per cent of the production of coarse and medium cloth. They
have also been permitted to export fine and super-fine cloth freely for shipment upto
the end of September 1952. Last week Government also permitted the free export of
coarse and medium cloth for shipment upto the end of August 1952. Government have
also assisted the industry in purchasing foreign cotton by arranging special credit
facilities, while the concomitant fall in the prices of raw cotton has been arrested by
Government’s offer to purchase the cotton at floor prices if necessary, backed by the
necessary organisation.
7.
The level of industrial production during 1951 showed a marked
improvement in spite of the special difficulties which some of the industries encountered
in obtaining essential raw materials and the cut in electric power in Bombay. During the
early months of this year the improvement in the production of important commodities
like steel, cement, and cotton textiles has been maintained. Production of jute goods in
the first three months of the year also showed an increase from the 1st of April the
industry has had to reduce working hours owing to a fall in demand which in its turn is
the result of the recent trend of prices. The abrupt change over from a seller’s to a
buyer’s market is reflected in the consumer resistance which the products of a number
of industries are encountering at the moment. But once the necessary adjustments have
been effected in production and prices it is hoped that the level of the production will
recover from its temporary set back.
8.
The improvement in agricultural production has also been well Maintained
although in the case of foodgrains the additional production from the Grow More Food
2

schemes was more that offset by the fall in production in large areas of the country
affected by drought or insufficient rains. Jute production has increased to 46.8 lakh
bales, nearly thrice the quantity produced in 1947-48. Although the cotton crop was
affected by adverse seasonal conditions, the yield is estimated at 33 lakh bales compared
with 24 lakhs bales in 1947-48. The production of sugar has shown a remarkable increase
and it estimated at 131/2 lakh tons as against 101/4 lakh tons in 1947-48. As the House is
aware, a committee under the Chairmanship of Shri V.T. Krishnamachari is enquiring
into the achievements of the Grow More Food campaign and the results of this enquiry
are being awaited with keen interest.
9.
The question has been frequently asked in recent weeks whether the fall in
prices over the last few months is not an indication of the onset of a recession or even a
depression. Personally I do not think that this is so, although I confess that in this
matter, where so much depends on unpredictable world developments it is hazardous to
prognosticate. But I believe that most competent observers are of the view that the fall
in prices represents in a sense the phase in which the inflationary trends which have
been such a marked feature of world economy for the last so many years have been
spent out and in our country, countered by measures deliberately adopted to curb them.
I do not subscribe to the view that at the present juncture the fall is a portent calling for
the reckless injection of purchasing power into the country’s economy. While it would
be premature to talk of anything in the nature of a recession it is clear that prices have
now reached a more stable level. I venture to suggest that a fall in prices is not per se a
thing to be feared especially if it can be brought about in an orderly manner. It is only
when it is of such a nature as to lead to a reduction in production and employment that
it contains a threat to the country’s economy. I need hardly assure the House that
Government are most keenly alive to this danger and that they would take adequate
steps, so far as lies in their power, to see that the level of production and employment is
not adversely affected by a disorderly movement of prices.
10. I shall now digress to deal briefly with the country’s balance of payments.
Honourable Members may remember that both in the White Paper on the interim budget
and in my speech last February I drew attention to the fact that the balance of payments
position during last year was not as favourable as in 1950. After taking into account the
amounts drawn from the American Wheat Loan the deficit on current transactions for
that year is likely to be of the order of Rs.30 crores. This deficit has continued during
the first four months of the current year and is reflected in the drop of Rs.81 crores in
the amount of our Sterling balances, between the end of December 1951 and the end of
April 1952.
11. I do not want the House to gather the impression from this that this position
was wholly unforeseen. Under the stimulus of the devaluation of the rupee and the
boom in prices which followed the out break of the Korean war we had accumulated a
substantial surplus in our balance of payments during 1950 and the early months of
3

1951. During this period we could not import as much as we could wish owing to the
difficulty of obtaining supplies from abroad. In consequence, the domestic stocks of
essential supplies had fallen to a low level and it became essential to take measures to
restore the stocks by reducing exports as for example of cotton textiles, oil and oil
seeds, and by stepping up imports of raw materials and essential consumer goods. We
also had to pay higher prices for whatever supplies we could obtain. The unavoidable
increase in the import of foodgrains also contributed to the large import surplus during
this period. It is not, therefore, a case of frittering away the ‘country’s assets; the deficit
could be said to be, in a sense, a planned deficit. I might mention in this connection that
till the end of last month the deficit on current transactions had been met wholly from
the surplus accumulated by us in 1950 and early 1951 and we had not to draw on the
release of £ 35 million for the year ending June 1952 under the Sterling Balances
Agreement.
12. During recent months the rate of the deficit in our balance of payments has
risen owing to a change in world conditions and the fall in the demand for some of our
principal exports and their prices. I mentioned earlier the various steps taken in the
field of export duties for stimulating exports and maintaining our export earnings. We
have also considerably relaxed the procedure for the licensing of exports. It is difficult,
when conditions are so fluid, to forecast the future trends which are affected as they are
bound to be, by conditions in world markets. But the House may rest assured that
Government will take all possible steps to arrest and reverse the recent trends and
maintain the deficit in the overall balance of payments within the amount available to
us from the accumulated sterling balances.
13. A brief account of the deterioration during 1951 in the dollar position of
this country and of the Sterling Area as a whole and the measures taken to stop the drain
on the Central reserves has been given in the White Paper circulated with the budget
papers. Although the measures taken by the Commonwealth Governments, following
the meeting of their Finance Ministers in London last January, have not taken full effect,
the rate of decline in the gold and dollar reserves of the Sterling Area has come down
considerably in March 1952. In our own case, it may be expected that the present
relatively improved position in the stocks of wheat and raw cotton should enable us to
reduce our dollar expenditure to some extent in the second half of this year. It is also
likely that the recent reduction in the export duty on hessian will stimulate exports. If
the negotiations for loans from the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, which are in train, result in the grant of loans, this will also assist the
country’s dollar position.
14. I shall now pass on to the changes made in the budget as presented to the
Provisional Parliament. But before I do so I should like to mention a change in procedure
in regard to the preparation of the demands for grants. It has been the practice so far,
where any recoveries are, under the accounting rules, taken in reduction of the
expenditure, to ask Parliament to vote the net sum under the demand. The recoveries so
4

included in these demands became in effect available for expenditure although they
may have no direct relation to the sum actually spent during Vie year. This procedure
has recently been examined in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General
and it has been decided that in future the demands for grants should be presented for the
gross amount of the expenditure, without regard to the recoveries that may come in
during the course of the year. These recoveries will continue to be adjusted in the accounts
as at present in reduction of the expenditure but, so far as the spending authorities are
concerned, these will not be available to them and they will be answerable to Parliament
for the gross amount of expenditure, which in a sense represents the real outgoings
from the Consolidated Fund for which the authority of Parliament is required. I need
hardly mention that this change does not involve any actual increase in expenditure. It
is only a change in the method of presentation and I hope that the elimination of these
recoveries from the budgets of spending authorities will result in an improvement in the
control of expenditure. A note explaining the changes made on this account in the
demands for grants is being circulated with the budget papers.
15. The budget presented last February provided for a surplus of Rs.18.73 crores
on revenue account and an overall deficit of Rs.56.35 crores, taking the revenue and
capital budgets together. I now estimate that the revenue surplus will be Rs.3.73 crores
and the overall deficit Rs.75.6 crores. The fall of Rs.15 crores in the revenue surplus is
mainly due to a drop of Rs.25 crores in the receipts from customs owing to the recent
reduction in the export duty on hessian and sacking, raw cotton and cotton waste, and
the abolition of the export duties on raw wool, groundnut oil, seeds, etc. This will be
partly counterbalanced by an improvement of Rs.5 crores in advance collections of
income-tax. On the expenditure side, I expect a drop of Rs.5 crores in civil expenditure,
made up of a reduction of Rs.10 crores in the provision for food subsidies set off by a
provision of Rs.5 crores for grants, of which Rs.3 crores represents the Central share of
the expenditure on community development schemes sponsored under the indo-U.S.
Technical Co-operation Agreement and Rs.2 crores is for subsidising industrial housing.
I do not propose any other change in the revenue budget at this stage. In the capital
budget I expect a worsening of Rs.4. 25 crores due to an additional provision of Rs.10
crores for loans to finance minor irrigation projects, Rs.5 crores for loans for industrial
housing, Rs.6 crores for loans for the community development projects mentioned earlier
and Rs.25 lakhs for investment in a machinery manufacturing corporation, which
Government have under consideration, partly set off by the receipt of Rs.10 crores from
the sale of American wheat carried over from last year, Rs.5 crores from the sale proceeds
of materials likely to be received under the Technical Cooperation Agreement and Rs.2
crores of short term loans returned by the State Governments. I do not think that the
f1guires under the other heads in the budget require to be changed.
16. Hon’ble members will notice that I propose to retain only a sum of Rs.15
crores in the budget for food subsidies out of the provision of Rs.25 crores made in the
budget last February. This amount will, I expect, be sufficient for meeting the expenditure
5

in accordance with the policy announced last February and the subsequent reduction in
the price of milo. This reduction in food subsidies has led to protests and demonstrations
from the sections of the public affected in the States. As I explained to the House at
some length last Tuesday, after giving the most anxious consideration to these criticisms Government feel that the policy adopted by them is inescapable and will prove to
be beneficial in the long term interests of the country. With the rise in the prices of
imported supplies we shall require something of the order of Rs.60 crores a year if, in
addition to subsidising milo, we are to maintain the subsidies in the industrial areas as
in last year and last year’s price level elsewhere. This by it self, would place an impossible
burden on the financial resources of the Centre. Even last year some States criticised
vigorously the subsidisation of industrial urban areas while in the rural areas outside
prices remained high. In the circumstances of the current year this gap would have been
widened and there is little room, for doubt that once a full subsidy for industrial urban
areas is conceded there would be an equally claimant demand for a corresponding subsidy
for rural areas. If the subsidy is to give the whole range of consumers prices charged in
industrial areas in 1951, the cost would amount to something like Rs.90 crores a year, I
am sure that there will be widespread agreement with the view that with so many
competing claims upon our resources, particularly for development of our economic
resources, calculated to secure more lasting benefits, it will be wasteful to spend sums
of this order on consumption by subsidising food. It has also to be remembered that the
increase in the price of food grains has to be considered against the back ground of the
reduction in the general price level of other commodities, the benefit of which goes to
the consumer. The movements in the working class cost of living indices at the various
industrial urban centres show that the compensatory fall in the aggregate on these other
commodities has been substantial. There is bound to be some measure of hardship,
owing to the disturbance of family budgets, until the necessary adjustments are made.
But this hardship is inevitable and Government are doing their best to mitigate for the
lower class by subsidising milo, wherever it is consumed. I regret I cannot hold out any
hope of a relief, in the form of the restoration of any system of subsidies committing the
Central exchequer to bring about an approximation between the prices of imported and
internally procured grain. But as mentioned by the President in his Address to Parliament,
Government are anxious that no distress should be caused and will do all in their power
to prevent this from happening.
17. I shall now summarise the result of the changes which I mentioned earlier.
The total revenue for the year is now estimated at Rs.404.98 crores and the expenditure
met from revenue at Rs.401.25 crores (of which Rs.197.95 crores will be on Defence
Services and Rs.203. 3 crores under civil heads) leaving a surplus of Rs.3.73 crores an
revenue account. The capital and ways and means budget is expected to snow a deficit
of Rs.79.33 crores, leaving an overall deficit of Rs.75.6 crores, taking the budget as a
whole. This, will leave at the end of the budget year, a closing balance of Rs.8 3. 08
crores, of which roughly Rs.40 crores will be the unspent balance of foreign aid received
6

by us the rest representing what any prudent management of the exchequer would need
as a minimum bank balance for the order of financial operations involved.
18. Although the estimated revenue surplus has now been reduced by Rs.15
crores and the overall budgetary deficit increased by Rs.19.25 crores, I do not propose
to make any changes in taxation. I expect I shall hear, in the course of the next few
weeks, complaints both from Members of Parliament and from the public that I have
given no concession to the tax-payer. The problem before me now is really not one of
having any money to give away but of how to make good the net loss of resources
which the changes I have proposed involve. In present circumstances when for the first
time in four years the ordinary citizen finds the price levels a little less irksome, there is
so much to be accomplished for the development of the country and there is no clear
indication of impunity for deficit financing. I do not feel that any one would seriously
suggest a reduction in taxation. In the last two years our revenues have been buoyant
largely on account of fortuitous and by no means welcome international developments
while the calls on our resources for essential expenditure have been steadily rising. The
recent developments in the economic situation, which have affected substantially our
revenues from customs, underline the need for strengthening the country’s revenue
position as far as possible it will be dangerous at this stage to do anything to weaken
Government’s revenue position and I have no doubt that there will be understanding
support for this view.
19. This leads me to the question of economy in public expenditure to which
Government’s attention is being continuously drawn both in Parliament and outside. So
far as the expenditure on Defence is concerned, while it is not possible to secure any
further appreciable reduction in the size of the Defence budget without a reduction in
the size of the Army, which the needs of the country’s security rule out for the present,
the search for economy in this expenditure has been continuously going on. As I
mentioned when I presented the budget last February, a critical examination of the
organisation and equipment of the Armed Forces, as they exist today, has been
undertaken. This examination, which is progressing satisfactorily, is expected to be
completed in the next few months. The progress made in this examination and the
tentative conclusions on some of the matters considered indicate the possibility of
effecting some savings. A firm estimate is still not possible but I hope to be in a position
to give the House an indication of this saving when I place before it, in due course, the
revised estimates for this year.
20. I also mentioned that I had deputed one or two senior officers to conduct a
similar enquiry into civil expenditure. This enquiry is still going on and it may be some
time before its results are available. But I must make it clear that in an expanding
economy like ours any saving realised in administrative expenditure is likely to be
more than absorbed by increasing demands for developmental expenditure. It will be
unwise to think that there is sufficient scope for economy to make possible a substantial
7

reduction in taxation. While the departmental search for economy continues, I also
look forward to continuing assistance from the labours of the Public Accounts and
Estimates Committees in securing that, within the four corners of the policy laid down
by Parliament, the moneys authorised to be spent by it are utilised to the best possible
advantage and without avoidable waste.
21. As I mentioned earlier, at the end of the budget year Government’s cash
balances would have dropped to approximately Rs.8 3 crores, a drop of about Rs.200
crores from the accumulated cash balances immediately after the partition. The bulk of
this money has been spent on essential purposes and on the development of the country,
and although there may be a difference of opinion as to whether every rupee of it has
been well spent, few will deny that the expenditure has substantially been for the security
or benefit of the country. The existence of these accumulated balances was a reserve
which will not be available in future years, as the level of the free balances which we
shall have reached at the end of March 1953, after omitting the unspent balance out of
the foreign assistance, will, as I have already pointed out, leave Government only with
the minimum balance which they ought to keep for the future. Therefore on the
assumption that the various indices do not point to the onset of persistent recession, we
shall have to raise currently all the money that we may need for meeting public
expenditure and for the execution of the five year plan. On any view of the future which
one could take, there con be no room for complacency or for the relaxation of the
efforts to raise the maximum amount of resources for the country’s development. The
Planning Commission has drawn up a realistic plan which would take us a definite step
forward in the realisation of the larger and fuller life, without which freedom would be
devoid of zest. We have received assistance from abroad for our development plan in
recent months through the U.S. Technical Co-operation Agreement the Ford Foundation,
the Colombo Plan and so on. But while all this to welcome and while one may hope for
an increasing flow of such assistance in the future, we have largely to rely on ourselves.
The edifice of our prosperity cannot be built on props of outside assistance without
sacrificing something vital in the nation’s spirit but can rebuilt enduringly only by the
efforts of our own people. If the budgetary burdens are sometimes found to be irksome,
I trust those who find it so in this House and outside will remember that we carry these
burdens for ourselves and our children and not for some one else. I have no doubt that
the realisation that the people of this country are doing the utmost in their power to help
themselves will widen the flow of assistance from our friends outside.
(May 23, 1952)

8

