SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R. DESAI MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1961-62

Sir,
I rise to present the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Government of India for the year 1961-82.
2.
With the close of the current year, we shall be completing a decade of
planned development and we shall be launching on the Third Five Year Plan.
Honourable Members will, I am sure, agree that the last 10 years have been a period
of striking development in almost all sectors of the economy. Large investments have
been made in agriculture, irrigation and power, major as well as medium and small
industries, transport and social services. We are perhaps too near these events to be
able to assess their full impact or significance. I venture to think that despite various
difficulties, we have succeeded in creating a new dynamism in the economy. The
public sector has gone forward and has taken on tasks which were entirely new. The
private sector also has advanced considerably. All over the country-in the cities and in
the towns as also in rural areas-one sees the beginnings of new developments in
various directions.
3.
The First Five Year Plan was a relatively modest effort, both in its scope
and its dimensions. Though the Plan was fulfilled satisfactorily. It became clearer,
even as we were proceeding with it, that unless we accelerated the tempo of
development, It would not be possible to lift our people out of poverty.
4.
The Second Five Year Plan was, in consequence, a bolder and more
ambitious one, It aimed at larger increases in production, investment and employment.
It was conceived in terms of a long-term strategy of development. Our objective is to
develop in the country, at as early a date as possible machine-building capacity on a
scale which would enable our development to proceed without dependence on the
import of capital goods. To achieve this progress has to be made over a wide field-in
the production of metals, particularly iron and steel, in the establishment of plants
intended to produce heavy machinery, as well as in the development of the necessary
techniques and skills. Even while we are proceeding with the development of
machine-building capacity, we have to strengthen the agricultural base and to provide
for the other basic needs of our growing population.
5.
Honourable Members are aware that in the course of the Implementation
of the Second Five Year Plan, we were confronted with major difficulties in regard to
resources, particularly external resources. It became necessary for us to make certain
1

adjustments in the Plan and to confine our attention primarily to the fulfilment of
what came to be described as the ‘core’ of the Second Five Year Plan. The target of
outlay in the public sector was cut down from Rs.4,800 crores to Rs.4,500 crores. As
the Second Five Year Plan draws to a close, we expect to exceed the revised target and
to attain an outlay of Rs.4,600 crores.
6.
As a result of this effort at developmental planning over the last 10 years,
industrial production has increased by about 66 per cent and agricultural production
has gone up by about 33 per cent. We have added substantially to the installed capacity
for steel and for a number of engineering industries including machine-making. The
chemical industries have also grown rapidly. At the same time, we have greatly
strengthened the basic services and amenities such as fuel, powers, transport and
irrigation which provide the foundation for rapid economic growth.
7.
During the Second Plan, the total additional taxation has been of the order
of Rs.1040 crores of which nearly Rs.800 crores were at the Centre. The resources
arranged by mobilisation of private savings, mainly through loans, small savings and
provident funds have yielded about Rs.1,400 crores and the extent of deficit financing
during the Plan period is expected to be about Rs.1100 crores as compared to Rs.1200
crores originally envisaged. This is satisfactory as far as it goes. We are now embarking
on a bigger Plan and we shall have to make a greater effort to direct our resources
through channels which lead to greater development and progress.
8.
The Third Plan in its final shape is expected to emerge shortly. The House
will have ample opportunity to discuss it in due course. I shall, therefore, dwell only
on some of its salient features and what it means in terms of the problem of providing
adequate resources for it. At the last meeting of the National Development Council,
we were confronted with a very difficult choice. On the one hand, our best estimates
of resources that we could hope to mobilise lead us to the conclusion that outlays in
the Plan should be limited to Rs.7500 crores. On the other hand, the programmes for
which there was necessity and readiness to proceed added up to a higher figure. The
Council has decided that for the purposes of physical planning, programmes with a
ceiling of Rs.8,000 crores should be prepared but the financial limit of Rs.7,500 crores
must be adhered to. The fact that we shall have larger programmes worked out win
enable us to start on their execution as soon as resources are in sight. At the same
time, we cannot and must not take on commitments beyond our resources. Throughout
the Third Plan we shall have to be careful to see that reliance on what is popularly
described as deficit financing is strictly limited. The size of the Plan, in other words,
will depend upon our tax effort and our ability to mobilise savings. No one would be
happier than I if we are in fact in a position to raise resources to a higher figure than
the target of Rs.7500 crores.
9.
Our estimate of resources for the Third Plan postulates that the surpluses
of various public enterprises should be available for financing the Plan. Besides
2

Railways for which there are separate arrangements, Government have in the last
decade invested large sums in various industrial undertakings in the public sector. It is
of basic importance that these enterprises should function on sound commercial
principles and should make adequate profits which can be ploughed back into further
investments.
10. Apart from the limitations regarding internal finance, we have to bear in
mind the crucial significance of external finance or foreign exchange in our planning.
The requirements of external assistance for the next five years as envisaged in the
Draft Outline are of a very substantial order and we do not propose to exceed this
limit. It is essential, in this context, that we should reduce expenditure of foreign
exchange in every conceivable direction and step up the level of exports. In the detailed
phasing of the Plan, we shall have to ensure that the foreign exchange gap in terms of
actual outgoings during the Third Plan, which we expect to fill by external aid, does
not exceed the estimates set out in the Draft Outline.
11. Developmental activities of this magnitude, with all the limitations which
we face, are not an easy task. They call for sacrifices. They necessitate a willingness
to go without many things. They involve a restraint on consumption in order that more
resourcesare available for investment. The degree of hardship which this development
entails can be alleviated to some extent by external aid. Such aid has been available
to us from friendly countries in the Second Plan period and has enabled us to make
substantial progress with our ‘core’ projects, in spite of the acute position in regard to
foreign exchange with which we were faced in the middle of the Plan. I am grateful
to all those who have helped us. But ultimately it is through our own efforts and our
own sacrifices that we can build our future.
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
12. Following the usual practice, I now propose to review briefly the economic
conditions in the country during the current year. The detailed assessment of the
emerging economic trends has been made in the Economic Survey which has been
circulated along with the Budget Papers. The Survey also draws attention in broad
terms to the considerations and objectives which should guide our fiscal and monetary
policies during the coming year. I shall not, therefore, go into the details of the economic
situation but shall confine my remarks to the salient features of 1960-61.
13. During the year, the economy advanced in several respects. Investment,
both public and private, was at a high level and the upward trend in industrial production
was accelerated. The agricultural season of 1959-60 was, however, not so favourable.
This reduced the domestic availability of foodgrains and raw materials. To an extent,
the shortage was met through additional Imports. Nevertheless, there was a significant
rise in the prices of agricultural raw materials as well as in the overall level of whole-sale
prices. The outlook in respect of agricultural and industrial production in the coming
year is, however, distinctly better. There is every hope that the upward trend in industrial
production will be maintained.
3

PRODUCTION
14. Agricultural production in 1959-60 did not come up to our original
expectations owing mainly to adverse climatic conditions. Food production at about
72 million tons was about 5 per cent less than in the previous year. There was also a
substantial decline in the output of cotton, raw jute and oilseeds. Sugarcane, however,
recorded a welcome increase of 6.6 per cent.
15. For the current agricultural year, the prospects are better. The Kharif crop
is expected to be as good as, if not better than the excellent crop of 1958-59, and Rabi
sowings have also been satisfactory. The output of cotton this year will also be
substantially larger than last year. A further increase in sugarcane production is expected.
For jute and oilseeds, however, the outlook is not equally promising.
16. Industrial production in the first ten months of 1960 showed an increase
of 11.5 per cent over the corresponding period of 1959. The rate of increase is the
highest we have achieved so far. The increase has occurred in almost all industries
and it is gratifying that it has been relatively larger in the case of intermediate products
and capital goods. Marked increases occurred in iron ore, iron and steel, industrial
machinery, paper and paper board, chemicals, cement, general and electrical engineering
goods and tansport equipment. The output of mill cloth-about 5000 million yards-was
also slightly higher than in 1959, in spite of the shortage of supplies of Indian cotton.
17. There has been a substantial addition to production capacity in a number
of important industries. Industrial activity in the country is getting diversified, and I
am particularly happy to find that a large number of small and medium enterprises is
coming up to establish new lines of production and to expand the existing ones. As the
House is aware, legislation was undertaken to facilitate the introduction of a scheme
of credit guarantee in respect of loans from commercial banks to small scale units
under the aegis of the Reserve Bank of India. The scheme is making good progress
and about 300 applications have been sanctioned during the last 7 months.
18. The expansion programme of the two steel works in the private sector has
been practically completed. The three public sector steel plants have made steady
progress and the next few months will see the commissioning of all the blast furnaces,
steel melting shops and rolling mills in these plants. The production of finished steel
in 1960 was about 2.2 million tons and it is expected to reach 3.5 million tons in 1961.
The steel expansion programme, together with the development of mining and transport
constitutes the sinews of our industrial development and has been given a very high
priority in our Third Plan.
19. The production of coal in 1960 was about 51 million tons as compared to
47 million tons in 1959. Most of the new mines in the public sector are now in
production. The Oil and Natural Gas Commission has continued its search for oil in
Jwalamukhi and Hoshiarpur areas in the Punjab, in Cambay and Ankleshwar areas in
4

Gujarat and in Rudrasagar areas in Assam. On the basis of the results of exploration
in Gujarat, it has been decided to set up a large refinery, which will be financed from
the recent Soviet credit.
20. A notable new field of development, the foundations of which were laid
in the Second Plan and which will receive special emphasis in the Third Plan, is
machine-building. The first phase of the Heavy Electrical Project at Bhopal has already
been completed and orders are now being placed for its second phase by utilising
British credit. Other projects in the field of heavy machinery, which will be completed
during the Third Five Year Plan, include the Heavy Machinery Plant at Ranchi, the
Mining Machinery Plant at Durgapur, both of which are being financed out of Soviet
credits, as well as the Foundry Forge which is being set up with Czechoslovak
collaboration. The Hindustan Machine Tools Factory at Bangalore has already attained
a higher level of production than was originally envisaged and is now engaged in a
programme of expansion. Development in machine-building capacity in the private
sector is also proceeding at a satisfactory pace and considerable progress has been
made with the manufacture of the plant and machinery required by the sugar, paper
and cement industries.
MONETARY TRENDS
21. During the year, money supply with the public increased by Rs.219 crores
as compared to an increase of Rs.171 crores in 1959. A major factor in this expansion
was bank credit. Governments’s indebtedness to the banking system increased much
less than in the previous year. The expansionary effect of these developments was
countered to a small extent by a decline in the foreign assets of the Reserve Bank.
22. The deposits of scheduled banks rose in 1960 by Rs.65 crores as compared
to Rs.254 crores in the previous year. This large reduction is due in the main to the
revised procedure regarding the placement of rupee counterpart funds arising out of
P.L.480 imports. These amounts were, until last year, deposited with the State Bank of
India which used to invest them along with their other funds in Treasury Bills or dated
Government securities. The arrangement gave a somewhat distorted picture of the
volume of deposits in scheduled banks and their investments in Government securities.
It was accordingly decided, in consultation with the American authorities, that these
moneys would, with effect from the 12th May 1960, be deposited directly with the
Reserve Bank of India who would invest them in special securities of the Government
of India. Further it has been arranged that from July 1960, for a limited period, the
past accumulations with the State Bank of India would be transferred to Government
in monthly instalments of Rs.12 crores. Even after making allowance for the effect of
these revised arrangements, the rise in bank deposits in 1960 was somewhat smaller
than in 1959.
23. The expansion of bank credit by the scheduled banks was on the other
hand much larger more than twice the expansion in 1959. In consequence, the
5

credit-deposit ratio went up from 53 per cent at the end of 1959 to 62 per cent at the
end of 1960. If P.L.480 deposits are excluded, the ratio works out to 72 per cent in
December 1960 as compared to 63 per cent a year ago. This strain on the resources of
commercial banks has resulted in an increase in their borrowings from the, Reserve
Bank despite a decline in gilt-edged securities in their portfolios.
24. The upward trend in equity prices noticed since 1958 gathered further
momentum and a speculative boom developed about the middle of the year. The index
of prices of variable dividend securities moved up by about 14 per cent in the course
of the first seven months of 1960. Commodity markets were also buoyant. With a
view to check these speculative trends the Reserve Bank introduced several measures
designed to restrain the total amount of credit creation. The bank rate remained
unchanged but penal rates were imposed on borrowings by banks above certain limits.
There is no doubt that while the banks must endeavour to meet the legitimate needs of
production and trade, every care must be taken to prevent excessive credit creation.
There has been a break in share values since July 1960 partly as a result of the
tightening of credit, partly in consequence of the steps taken by the stock exchanges
themselves by adjusting their margin requirements, and partly through some changes
in the working policies of the capital issues control. The index of variable dividend
securities which had risen to 182 by the end of July 1960 stood at 165 about the end
of the year.
25. In passing I might also refer to the Refinance Corporation which was set
up in 1958 to assist banks in financing medium-sized industries. We have during
recent months substantially enlarged the scope of its operations by extending the
facilities to a larger number of banks as also to State Finance Corporations and selected
State Co-operative Banks, increasing the period of loans from 7 to 10 years, where
necessary, and giving a larger discretion to the Corporation in regard to the industries
to be assisted. These modifications, helped possibly by the stringency of funds, have
resulted in an increase in the loans disbursed from Rs.85 lakhs in 1959 to Rs.141
lakhs in 1960, while the loans advanced in the month of January 1961 exceeded Rs.70
lakhs.
26. The banking sector has a very important role to play in the mobilisation
and husbanding of resources for our developmental plans and Government are therefore
vitally interested in its health and vitality. The House is aware of the steps that we
have taken to safeguard the interests of depositors including the powers to facilitate
reconstruction or amalgamation of banks. Recently, we have promulgated an Ordinance
to remove certain difficulties experienced in their reconstruction or amalgamation
with other banks and to permit amalgamation under the Banking Companies Act with
the State Bank of India. These measures will help to strengthen some of the more
vulnerable units of the Indian banking system, which, I am convinced, is basically
strong and sound. Government are determined to take whatever steps may be necessary
for the efficient management of banks and for protecting the interests of the depositors.
6

PRICES
27. The index of whole-sale prices which was 117.9 at the end of 1959 rose
to a peak of 127.4 by the middle of October 1960, but declined to 124.3 at the end of
the year. The average for 1960 works out (at 6.5 per cent higher than for 1959, the rise
in respect of industrial raw materials, mainly oil seeds, raw cotton and raw jute, being
18 per cent, and in manufactures 11 per cent. Rice prices rose by about 7 per cent,
while wheat prices declined by 11 per cent; the index of foodgrains, taken as a group,
has shown a small fall. We have been keeping a continuous watch over the trend of
prices and in the case of specific commodities, such as, cotton, jute and groundnuts
taken suitable steps like the introduction of quota system and the enforcement of
credit restrictions supplemented by the tightening of margins in the commodity markets.
Towards the end of 1960, the price index of rice, however, fell significantly. There
was a seasonal rise in the index in the month of January which at the end of the month
stood at 126.2 as compared to 119.2 at the end of January last year. The working class
cost of living index has shown only a small increase, the index being 124 for December,
1960 as compared to 122 a year earlier.
28. The rising trend in prices has persisted almost throughout the Second
Plan. Some price increases are inevitable in a developing economy. It should, however,
be our aim to ensure that in the period of the Third Plan, the prices of the essential
goods that enter into the common man’s budget remain relatively stable. The Plan has
been drawn up with due regard to this objective. A substantial increase in food
production is the foundation on which the Plan rests, and I should like to take this
opportunity of appealing both to our farmers and to the official and non-official agencies
concerned with development in the rural areas to concentrate their effort on achieving
the target of 100 million tons set out in the Draft Outline, of the Plan.
29. Government have in hand sizable stock of foodgrains amounting to 2.5
million tons, and thanks to the agreement in respect of P.L.480 imports signed last
year with the United States, they also have an assurance of further supplies in the
coming years. While this second string to our bow is essential as well as welcome, it
should be regarded primarily as a stand-by to get over the bottlenecks which have
impeded us in the past in achieving our targets of increased agricultural production.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
30. The balance of payments situation during 1960-61, the last year of the
Second Five Year Plan, took a turn for the worse. The Sterling assets held by the
Reserve Bank of India on the 17th February, 1961 were Rs.157 crores which are
Rs.46 crores lower than at this time last year. A part of this decline is attributable to
the repayment of the stand-by credit from the International Monetary Fund amounting
to about Rs.11 crores. This repayment increases our borrowing capacity from the
Fund and is not therefore a matter of concern. Apart from this, however, there has
been a substantial fall in our balances on other accounts, a detailed analysis of which
is set out in the Economic Survey.
7

31. The decline which has taken place in our foreign exchange reserves during
the current financial year gives cause for reflection and concern. First of all, it underlines
the importance of stepping up our export promotion efforts. This is not an easy task in
a developing economy where the standards of living are as low as they are in India.
But an increase in our export earnings is vital to the success of our Plan. One of the
weaknesses from which our industrial economy suffers is that, with the exception of
a few industries like jute, cotton textiles and tea, most industries look to the vast
domestic market and do not exert themselves to sell abroad. Considering that the
supply of raw materials, components, spare parts and other essentials for our industries
constitutes such an important element in expenditure of foreign exchange, it is essential
that every industry which depends on imports should endeavour to earn at least part of
the foreign exchange it spends by selling its products abroad. Greater attention to this
consideration will have to be paid in the future. Government, for its part, will stand
ready to help export industries in every way-by more liberal treatment in the matter of
foreign exchange allocations, by speedy refund of internal taxes and duties levied on
such products as are exported and in other ways.
32. We shall have to be even more careful about expenditure of foreign
exchange. There has been a considerable tightening of import control restrictions.
There are, however, various other ways in which foreign exchange is spent. One of
these is expenditure on travelling abroad for one reason or another. It has been necessary
to tighten allocations of foreign exchange for educational purposes by weeding out
tome of the less beneficial courses of study abroad. For other purposes too a stricter
policy is being followed.. There is a significant number of persons who, it appears, go
abroad without any release of foreign exchange from the Reserve Bank but who are
able to provide themselves with funds by various other devices. It is not my intention,
at this stage, to place a ban on travelling abroad by people who have not received an
allocation of foreign exchange, because there are quite a number of people who
genuinely go as guests, on scholarships, and through other legitimate means. At the
same time, the House will agree that we cannot allow the existing state of affairs to
continue. I, therefore, propose shortly to provide for the submission by persons going
abroad of a form containing information about the manner in which they are finding
the foreign exchange for themselves. Cases of a doubtful nature will, where the facts
warrant, be further pursued.
33. Our efforts to promote exports and to save on imports will not, however,
by themselves, solve our foreign exchange problem. The ultimate solution can only be
found through the efforts we are making to develop the country industrially and
economically. While we are engaged in this process, we shall need massive external
aid. We had started our Second Five Year Plan with our sterling balances around
Rs.746 crores. We are now embarking on a bigger Plan with our reserves at a much
lower level. In doing so we are appreciative of the fact that in the world outside there
is now a general recognition of the need to help us in our developmental effort and
8

there is an acceptance of the position that our aim is to achieve a rate of progress
which cannot, in any sense, be said to be over ambitious.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
34. During the year 1960 the World Bank sanctioned two loans-Rs.33 crores
for the development of our Railways and Rs.10 crores for the industrial Credit and
investment Corporation of India. The U.S. Development Loan Fund granted loans
amounting to Rs.107 crores for various power projects and for the construction of a
fertiliser plant at Trombay. The U.S. Export-Import Bank extended a second credit of
Rs.24 crores. The United Kingdom Government sanctioned two loans totalling Rs.20
crores to pay for capital goods purchased in that country. Of the $ 100 million aid
promised by the West German Government in 1958, $ 40 million were authorised in
1959 and the balance of $ 60 million in 1960. Among the other loans and credits
negotiated during the year were Rs.14 crores by Poland, Rs.11 crores by Switzerland
and Rs.19 crores by Yugoslavia.
35. The third meeting of the consortium of the countries helping India was
convened by the World Bank in September 1960 in Paris, chiefly for making a
preliminary assessment of our requirements for the Third Plan. Following this meeting,
the U.K. Government have offered a sum of Rs.67 crores as initial assistance for our
Third Plan and the Government of West Germany have agreed to our placing orders
in that country up to Rs.28 crores, besides consenting to the postponement of a major
portion of the repayments falling due in the current and the next year on account of
the loan for the Rourkela Project. The House will recall that in 1959 the Government
of U.S.S.R. had agreed to make available an amount of Rs.179 crores as an initial
credit towards their collaboration in the Third Plan Projects. This has been supplemented
by the offer of an additional credit of about Rs.60 crores for which an agreement was
signed last week.
36. The Commodities Agreement under P.L.480 of the value of Rs.636 crores
signed with the United States in May last provides for the import of 18 million tons of
wheat, 1 million tons of rice and also certain quantities of maize, milo, cotton, tobacco
and soyabean oil. The foodgrains imported under this agreement will enable us to
build up sizable reserves. The total value of commodities covered by the agreements
so far signed under P.L.480 amounts to a little over Rs.1096 crores.
37. We continued to receive assistance from the Colombo Plan countries, the
grants of Canada both for projects and in the shape of key commodities like non-ferrous
metals deserving special mention. We were also helped by assistance from the United
Nations and its specialised agencies and from the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations.
While we have been receiving aid from the more advanced countries, we have, for our
part, been ready and willing, within the limit of our resources, to help other countries
by providing training facilities and services of experts under the Technical Co-operation
Scheme of Colombo Plan as well as in other ways. The aid to Nepal during the current
9

and next year would amount to Rs.6 crores. In addition, we have continued to assist
our neighbours, Sikkim and Bhutan in their development plans.
38. In the five years of the Second Plan period, the total foreign loans and
credits covered by formal loan agreements are of the order of Rs.1517 crores of which
Rs.1387 crores are on Government account, including the carry over of unspent balance
from the First Plan amounting to Rs.87 crores. The total utilisations during the Second
Plan period are estimated at Rs.752 crores, leaving an unspent balance of Rs.722
crores to be carried forward to the next Plan. Of this balance, Rs.329 crores are for
credits which are intended for financing the projects included in the Third Plan.
39. We have been receiving aid from friendly countries throughout the Second
Five Year Plan. I should like, at this juncture, to pay a special tribute to the role of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development under the leadership of its
President, Mr. Eugene Black, in organising meetings of a consortium of countries who
have jointly been discussing the question of aid to India in a friendly and constructive
spirit.
FINANCE COMMISSION
40. As Honourable Members are aware, the award of the Second Finance
Commission for the devolution of resources from the Centre to the States covers the
five years ending 1961-62. The Second Finance Commission had, however, experienced
considerable difficulties in assessing the requirements of the State Governments as
the period covered by their recommendations extends over both the Second and Third
Plans. They had therefore recommended that the period of the Finance Commission’s
award should, in future be made to coincide with that of the Plan. The Third Finance
Commission wasp accordingly, constituted in December last and it has been requested
to give its recommendations for the four years from 1962-63 to 1965-66. As on the
previous occasions the Commission will, in addition to making recommendations on
the sharing of Taxes on income and Union Excises, advise on the grants to be paid to
the States which are in need of assistance, keeping in view the requirements of the
Third Plan and the efforts expected of them to raise additional revenues. The
Commission will also report on the changes, if any, to be made in the principles
governing the distribution of Estate Duty and the manner in which the grant payable
in lieu of States’ share of Tax on Railway Fares should be distributed amongst them.
As the Tax on Railway Fares is being abolished with effect from ist April 1961, the
recommendations of the Commission for the distribution of the grant in lieu of this tax
will take effect from the next year.
CHANCES IN ACCOUNTS
41. For some time past it has been felt that the existing accounting structure,
which has continued more or less unchanged ever since It was drawn up at the time of
the introduction of the Government of India Act, 1935, should be rationalised and
recast in the light of the subsequent Constitutional changes and the rising tempo of
10

Government developmental expenditures. The matter was reviewed in consultation
with the, Comptroller and Auditor General and It has been decided that the changes
may be phased over a period of two years. The changes introduced in the coming year
have been explained in detail in the Explanatory Memorandum.
42. I shall refer only to the important items. As Honourable Members know,
the group head “Civil Administration” includes not only budget heads dealing with
administration such as ‘General Administration’, ‘Audit’, ‘Police’ and ‘Jails’ but also
major heads pertaining to developmental activities of Government such as ‘Education’,
‘Agriculture’, and ‘Medical’. Apart from the fact that the nomenclature ‘Civil
Administration’ is somewhat misleading, the budget in its present form, does not
indicate separately the expenditure incurred by Government on its administrative
activities and on social and developmental activities. To remedy this defect the group
head ‘Civil Administration’ is being split up into two: “Administrative Services” and
“Social and Developmental Services”. The splitting up of group head “Civil
Administration” will assist Honourable Members to assess the growth of administrative
expenditure more correctly.
43. With the exception of certain statutory grants, grants-in-aid to State
Governments have hitherto been recorded subject-wise under the relevant major heads
of account and provided in the grants concerned. These grants are, however, not final
expenditures of the Central Government on those activities but are merely transfers of
resources from the Centre to the States. They are accordingly being segregated under
a separate head ‘Grants-in-aid to States’ and the provision included in a single composite
demand. The various types of grants namely statutory, plan and non-plan, will however
be indicated separately under this head according to the Ministries administering them.
This arrangement will give at one place the total of the grants from the Centre to the
States and will also facilitate integrated control on the utilisation of these grants.
44. I might also refer to another change which might be of interest to
Honourable Members. Payments to States of their share of Union Excise Duties have
so far been shown as expenditure under the major head ‘2-Union Excise Duties’.
These amounts are also in the nature of transfer of resources to the States and will
hereafter be shown under a distinct major head ‘States’ Share of Union Excise Duties’.
45. It has also been decided that expenditure on labour and employment, which
is at present exhibited under the heads ‘Miscellaneous Departments’ and
‘Miscellaneous’, should from the next year be recorded under a new major head
“Labour and Employment”.
46. I am sure the House will welcome these changes which will help to give
a clearer picture of the purposes for which sums are being provided in the budget.
11

FINANCIAL YEAR 1960-61
47. The budget for the current year, as finally approved by Parliament, placed
the revenue at Rs.919.65 crores and expenditure at Rs.980.35 crores, with the resultant
revenue deficit of Rs.60.70 crores. According to the present assessment, the revenue
now is likely to amount to Rs.923.72 crores and expenditure to Rs.957.38 crores,
leaving a deficit of Rs.33.66 crores.
48. The gross revenue shows an improvement of Rs.40.13 crores due mainly
to better realisation of Union Excise Duties and income-tax including Corporation
Tax, but these improvements will be largely counter-balanced by the increase of
Rs.36.06 crores in the States’ share of taxes. In the net, the revenue will show an
increase of Rs.4.07 crores. The receipts of Rs.163 crores from Customs are at about
the same level as estimated in the Budget. Union Excises including Additional Excises
will yield Rs.394.98 crores, an increase of Rs.15.37 crores over the original estimate.
This increase is spread over most of the items, notably, tobacco, refined diesel oil and
motor vehicles, and is attributable to improvement in production and larger clearances
during the year. The Taxes on income including Corporation Tax are expected to
increase by Rs.25 crores due mainly to the completion of a larger number of assessments
pertaining to earlier years and better realisations than originally anticipated. The share
of income-tax payable to the States will at the same time go up by Rs.34.92 crores as
a result of larger collections during the year and arrears payable for earlier years. This
will, however, be partially neutralised by a reduction of Rs.7.43 crores in the ad hoc
grants to the States in lieu of the loss in their share of income-tax following the
changes in the Company tax structure, for which provision is made in the expenditure
estimates. The surcharge on Iron and steel, which is transferred to the Iron and Steel
Equalisation Fund, is likely to yield Rs.2.1 crores less, while the grants under P.L.480
programme will drop by Rs.5 crores.
49. The revenue expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs.957.38 crores
against the original estimate of Rs.980.35 crores. Defence Services account for
Rs.266.72 crores and Civil Expenditure for Rs.690.86 crores.
50. The saving of Rs.17.43 crores in the Civil Expenditure is the cumulative
effect of changes over several heads. Debt services will show a saving of Rs.2.24
crores due chiefly to smaller issues of market loans and treasury bills, partly
counter-balanced by larger payment of interest on Post Office Savings Bank deposits
and savings certificates. The transfer of the surcharge to the Steel Equalisation Fund
and of the grant under P.L.480 to the Special Development Fund together will account
for a fall of Rs.7.1 crores. As I mentioned earlier, the ad hoc grants to the States in lieu
of income-tax will drop by Rs.7.43 crores but the grants to States for raising the
emoluments of low-paid employees will increase by Rs.2.41 crores.
51. The net expenditure on Defence Services this year is estimated to show a
saving of Rs.5.54 crores. This is mainly due to a lower expenditure on the purchase of
stores and equipment than was originally anticipated.
12

FINANCIAL YEAR 1961-62
52. For the coming year, at the existing level of taxation, I am budgeting for
a total revenue of Rs.962.92 crores and an expenditure of Rs.1023.52 crores, leaving
a deficit of Rs.60.60 crores.
53. The revenue from Customs is expected to show a modest increase of Rs.1
crore over the current year’s revised estimate, whereas Union Excises are likely to
improve further by Rs.11.26 crores and Taxes on income and Corporation Tax together
by Rs.6 crores. The contribution from Railways is expected to increase by Rs.16.23
crores due mainly to the implementation of the recommendations of the Railway
Convention Committee. The rate of dividend will increase from 4 per cent to 41/4 per
cent. Further, the Railways will be paying an additional annual contribution of Rs.12.5
crores to the General Revenues in lieu of the Tax on Railway Fares, which will be
distributed amongst the States by way of grant. The profits of the Reserve Bank will
show an increase of Rs.21 crores over the current year’s amount of Rs.40 crores and
the grant under P.L.480 is estimated to go up by Rs.5 crores. The share of income Tax
payable to the States is expected to be lower by Rs.6.19 crores next year mainly on
account of smaller payment of arrears in respect of earlier years. These improvements,
however, will be partly counter-balanced by decreases under several heads, notably,
surcharge on iron and steel which will drop further by Rs.3.4 crores as a result of the
provisional increase in the retention price of steel.
54. Civil Expenditure next year shows an increase of Rs.49.94 crores over the
current year, s revised estimates. In view of the changes in the classification of accounts
to which I have referred earlier, the figures for 1961-62 are not quite comparable with
the corresponding figures for the current year. I shall however, make allowance for the
effect of these changes under the appropriate heads while commenting on some of the
important provisions. The growing volume of internal and external borrowings accounts
for an increase of Rs.9.55 crores under Debt services. The variations in respect of the
surcharge on iron and steel and the grant under P.L.480 referred to above will also be
reflected on the expenditure side. Excluding grants to States, which will now be
exhibited separately, and transfer of the surcharge mentioned earlier, Social and
Developmental Services are expected to cost Rs.32.88 crores more next year. This
increase is spread over almost all the heads and is attributable chiefly to the
implementation of the schemes included in the Third Plan. The ad hoc grants payable
to the States in lieu of loss in their share of income-tax following the changes made in
the Company tax structure will go up by Rs.2.76 crores. Excluding the grants payable
as a result of the abolition of the tax on Railway Fares to which I have referred earlier,
the grants to the States next year will decrease by Rs.18.35 crores mainly on account
of the discontinuance of the grants for raising the emoluments of low-paid employees
which were payable only during the Second Plan period. The Third Finance Commission
is expected to take this factor into account in assessing the needs of the State
Governments for assistance from the Centre.
13

55. The net expenditure on Defence Services next year shows an increase of
Rs.16.2 crores. Army estimates will go up by Rs.9.2 crores, whereas Navy and Air
Force together will require Rs.3.54 crores more. The Non-effective Charges also account
for an increase of Rs.3.46 crores attributable chiefly to the recent decision to extend
to the military pensioners with retrospective effect the benefit of temporary increase
in small pensions admissible from 1st April, 1958 on the Civil side. The overall increase
in Defence Estimates is due mainly to the additional commitments of Armed Forces
including the expansion of certain establishments and provision for payments to Service
Officers on the basis of the recommendations of the Pay Commission.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
56. Excluding the adjustment for the transfer of assistance from the United
States to the Special Development Fund, which is technically classified as capital
expenditure, the current year’s budget provided Rs.371 crores for capital outlay. The
corresponding figure is now estimated at Rs.416 crores, an increase of Rs.45 crores.
On account of larger imports, particularly of wheat, the net expenditure on the purchase
of foodgrains will increase by Rs.30.48 crores. The requirements for the construction
of border roads are likely to exceed the original estimate by Rs.13.5 crores. An additional
amount of Rs.7.94 crores will be required for exploration of oil by the Oil and Natural
Gas Commission, while payment of Rs.8.27 crores had to be made to the World Bank
under the Indus Waters Treaty. These increases will be partly counter-balanced by
shortfalls under certain other items of capital expenditure. Detailed explanations for
the variations under other heads have, as usual, been given in the notes on the Demands
for Grants and in the Explanatory Memorandum.
57. The corresponding provision for capital, outlay next year is Rs.454 crores,
showing an increase of Rs.38 crores over the current year’s revised estimate. This
increase is spread over a number of heads and reflects the additional requirements in
the first year of the Third Plan. Railways will be spending Rs.36.38 crores more for
their capital outlay but the net expenditure on purchase of foodgrains will go down by
Rs.26 crores. Of the other major increases, mention may be made of Rs.7.7 crores
under border roads, Rs.8.46 crores for industrial development, Rs.5.2 crores for the
development of land acquired by the Delhi Administration and Rs.2.83 crores for the
construction of food storage godowns.
58. In addition to the direct capital outlay just mentioned, the estimates provide
Rs.356.07 crores this year and Rs.409.22 crores next year for loans to States and
Rs.174.37 crores this year and Rs.170.60 crores next year for loans to other parties
including Port Trusts, Government-owned Corporations and foreign Governments.
59. Provision has been included in the next year’s estimates for a total
expenditure of Rs.943 crores for implementing the Plan of which Rs.181 crores
would be on revenue account and the balance of Rs.762 crores as capital outlay
including loans. In addition, the Railways will provide Rs.23 crores from their own
14

resources. These estimates include a provision of Rs.352 crores for assistance to
States, Rs.90 crores in the Revenue budget and Rs.262 crores in the Capital budget.
It is expected that the States will find Rs.200 crores from their own funds, thus
making up an outlay of Rs.552 crores for the State plans. The outlay on the Central
portion of the Plan will aggregate to Rs.614 crores. In all, the total Plan outlay in
the first year of the Third Plan both for the Centre and the States will be of the order
of Rs.1166 crores. In making these provisions, we have borne in mind the need for
proper and careful phasing. A substantial portion of the provision during the coming
year relates to the Second Plan projects which will be carried forward to the Third
Plan and a relatively modest provision has been made for the new projects which
require much preparatory work.
WAYS AND MEANS
60. The overall deficit for the current year was estimated in the original budget
at Rs.153 crores. According to the present assessment, this deficit is now expected to
come down to Rs.15 crores. The improvement of Rs.138 crores is the result of a
number of factors. The revenue deficit is now expected to go down by Rs.27 crores.
The revised procedure regarding the deposit of P.L.480 funds with the Reserve Bank
of India, to which I have alluded earlier, accounts for investments in special securities
of Rs.240 crores-Rs.108 crores on account of transfers from the State Bank of India
and Rs.132 crores due to net fresh accruals. The opening cash balance exceeded the
original estimate by Rs.19 crores. This improvement of Rs.286 crores will be partly
offset by an increase of Rs.45 crores in capital expenditure mentioned earlier, decline
of Rs.84 crores in the net internal and external borrowings and worsening to the
extent of Rs.19 crores under other debt heads.
61. The Budget had assumed credit for market loans at Rs.250 crores including
Rs.25 crores from Prize Bonds. During the year, two loans were floated: 31 per cent
Bonds, 1966, and 4 per cent Loan, 1980 for a total sum of Rs.175 crores. Conversion
facilities were also offered to the holders of 2-3/4 per cent Loan, 1960,4 per cent
Loan, 1960-70 and 21/4 per cent Hyderabad Loan, 1955-60 maturing during the year.
The total amount subscribed was Rs.180.70 crores including Rs.74.6 crores by way
of conversion.
62. The Prize Bonds are expected to yield a sum of Rs.12.5 crores by the end
of the year. As Honourable Members are aware, during the first few months of the
introduction of the scheme, the sale of these bonds was very brisk but thereafter the
demand for them has slackened appreciably. I believe, however, that these bonds have
much attraction for a large mass of the people and with more intensive and co-ordinated
efforts on the part of both non-official and official organisations, particularly in the
States, it should be possible to improve substantially on the recent performance.
63. The House will recall that in pursuance of the decision for the gradual
funding of a part of the ad hoc Treasury Bills held in the issue Department of the
15

Reserve Bank of India, Treasury Bins of the value of Rs.300 crores were converted in
1958-59 and another batch of Rs.150 crores in 1959-60, into dated securities. We have
continued this process during the current year by conversion of another batch of
Treasury Bills worth Rs.50 crores.
64. Small savings have, during the last three years, shown encouraging results.
The net collections last year aggregated to Rs.84 crores. During the first ten months of
the current year net collections have exceeded the collections for the corresponding
period last year by Rs.19 crores, and we are, for the first time, likely to end the year
with a net collection of Rs.100 crores. The co-operation and response which the large
masses of people have shown in contributing to the success of the Small Savings
movement is very heartening and augurs well for the future. I should like to take this
opportunity of expressing my appreciation of the assistance rendered in this direction
by non-official agencies-particularly the Advisory Boards at the Centre and the
States-and the official organisations under the various Ministries. I hope these
encouraging trends will receive further momentum in the Third Plan which places the
receipts from this source at Rs.585 crores. It would, however, not be wise to rest on
our oars and take the present improvement for granted. A greater intensification of our
efforts will be necessary in order to achieve that target. Development involves sacrifice
and the essence of democratic planning is that the sacrifice should be evenly spread
and should be forthcoming readily and voluntarily. I invite every citizen to participate
in this sacrifice and to save more in order to invest more in the Small Savings Schemes.
65. In the budget for the coming year, I have taken a credit for a gross market
borrowing of Rs.235 crores. For small savings, I have taken a net credit of Rs.105
crores, representing an increase of Rs.5 crores over the likely receipts this year. On
the basis of our present assessment, the foreign assistance expected during the coming
year is estimated at Rs.421 crores. The net investment of P. L.480 Funds is likely to
be of the order of Rs.96 crores including the transfer of Rs.36 crores from the moneys
formerly deposited with the State Bank.
66. I may now state, in brief, the overall budgetary position next year. The
revenue deficit at the existing level of taxation is expected to amount to Rs.61 crores.
Net capital outlay is estimated at Rs.454 crores, loans to State Governments and
others at Rs.580 crores and debt repayments at Rs.167 crores. The total outgo of
Rs.1262 crores will be met to the extent of Rs.235 crores from public borrowings in
India, Rs.105 crores from small savings, Rs.421 crores from foreign assistance, Rs.176
crores from loan recoveries, Rs.96 crores from the investment of P. L.480 Funds and
Rs.104 crores from miscellaneous receipts, leaving an overall budgetary deficit of
Rs.125 crores.
67.

I shall now turn to the taxation proposals for the coming year.
16

PART ‘B’
68. Taxation in a developing economy plays a vital part. It is more than a
mere budgetary device to pay for the cost of Administration. It is an instrument of
economic policy.
69. I have already emphasized the importance of our tax effort in raising
resources for the Plan. The Third Plan envisages an increase in tax revenue from 8.5
to 11 per cent of the national income. It is no longer a question of trying through
taxation to cover the deficit on revenue account from year to year. We have to raise
resources for the Plan as a whole. It is clear that every one must contribute towards
the task of development on which we have embarked. It has been my endeavour,
however, in framing my proposals to see that the tax burden does not fall too heavily
on any one section of the community. It has, therefore, been necessary to have a large
list of items over which the tax burden is spread. I have also aimed at securing that the
incidence of taxation on lower income groups is very small. Finally I have tried to
ensure that through our tax system we further our economic objectives.
We have to see that by our tax policies we discourage imports and encourage
exports. It is also necessary to discourage consumption and encourage investment.
70. The proposals I am about to present both for direct taxation and for indirect
taxation have these objectives in view.
CUSTOMS AND UNION EXCISES
71. In regard to Customs my proposals envisage the raising of the rates of
duty on 41 items. The changes in rates of duties have been explained in detail in the
memorandum circulated with the budget papers. I will, however, refer to some of the
important changes.
72. I propose to increase the existing duty on betelnuts by 80 nP per kilogram.
This will serve to some extent to mop up the high margin of profit on this commodity.
The proposal is estimated to yield an additional revenue of Rs.57 lakhs in a year. It is
proposed to step up the existing duty on unmanufactured tobacco by about 50 per
cent. This is likely to give Rs.89 lakh annually. The existing duty of 50 per cent ad
valorem on certain textile manufactures will be raised to 100 per cent ad valorem.
This will be consistent with the generally higher rates of duty on other textile items.
The proposal will bring in additional revenue of Rs.68 lakhs. Similarly, the duty of 35
per cent ad valorem on iron and steel manufactures is to be increased to 50 per cent
ad valorem, the extra annual yield being Rs.1 crore approximately.
73. Manufacture of machinery is developing fast in the country. As a measure
to assist its growth, it is proposed to raise the import duty on machinery and components.
My proposal for this item is two-fold, firstly to raise the statutory rate of duty from 10
per cent ad valorem to 15 per cent ad valorem, except in regard to the items on which
17

there is a commitment under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and secondly
to raise the concessional rate of duty at present applicable to certain types of machinery
exempted under executive notification from 5 per cent ad valorem to 10 per cent ad
valorem. The general policy of the Government has been to keep the duties on capital
goods as low as possible. The increase being small should, however, make little
difference to the cost of production. The proposal is estimated to yield an additional
revenue of Rs.7.76 crores.
74. I propose to increase the duty on spirits, wines and malt and to impose a
duty on hops and expect as a result an annual yield of Rs.24 lakhs.
The existing duty on electrical and other instruments, apparatus and appliances
not otherwise specified is proposed to be raised by an addition of 10 per cent ad
valorem. Itis also proposed to increase the existing duty on railway material for
permanent way and rolling stock and their component parts by 5 per cent ad valorem,
the estimated extra annual yield from these two changes being Rs.1.48 crores.
The duty on the residuary item of “all other articles not otherwise specified”
falling under entry 87 of the Tariff Schedule is to be raised by 10 per cent ad valorem,
the additional yield being Rs.2.43 crores.
75. I am also proposing a small increase in duty on newsprint. In 1937, the
statutory rate of duty on newsprint was 25 per cent. For convenience, however, the
duty was fixed by notification at certain specific rates which then worked out to about
25 per cent. The statutory rate of duty on paper including newsprint has since increased
to 40 per cent plus excise duty, whereas the specific rates on newsprint have remained
almost the same. On the other hand, the price of newsprint has increased considerably
in the interval, with the result that the ad valorem incidence of the specific rates of
duty now works out to less than 5 per cent as against the rate of 25 per cent, when it
was originally fixed. It is proposed to raise this duty to about 10 per cent ad valorem.
The change is being given effect to by a notification. The estimated yield as a result
of this change is Rs.38 lakhs a year.
76. Tea which is one of our very good foreign exchange earners has lately
been losing ground in the international market. In order to encourage its export, it is
proposed to reduce the export duty on tea by 9 nP per kilogram, that is by about 17 per
cent, resulting in a loss of Rs.2 crores.
77. The net effect of these changes will be to increase the Customs revenue
byRs.16.95 crores.
78. Following the changes in excise duties to which I shall refer presently,
provision is being made, wherever necessary, for the levy of countervailing import
duties so that the indigenous producer is not placed at a disadvantage. The additional
revenue resulting from the countervailing duties is expected to be Rs.12.32 crores
a year.
18

79. Turning to Union Excise duties, I propose to make changes in the rates of
duty in respect of 14 commodities already subject to the levy and to impose the duty
on 18 new commodities.
80. With the object of restraining consumption of tea and assisting its export,
I propose to increase the excise duty on loose tea by 5 to 8 nP per kilogram. The rate
on package tea is, at the same time, being reduced by 6 nP per kilogram, as the present
rate of duty is leading to a shift in the customary trade. These measures will yield
Rs.1.98 crores. With a similar object, the rate of duty on coffee is also proposed to be
increased by about 33 per cent, bringing in Rs.38lakhs.
Tobacco has been one of our stable revenue earners. Major changes in its tariff
structure were made in 1957 but experience has shown the need for some simplification
and rationalisation. In order to discourage lower rated tobacco being used as a substitute
for tobacco bearing a higher rate, it is necessary to narrow the difference between the
two rates. It is also necessary to step up the duty on stalks. The structure of duty on
air and flue cured tobacco and on cigarettes and on cigars and cheroots is being
simplified. These changes will yield an additional revenue of Rs.2.58crores.
81. With the improvement in the standards of living, consumption of kerosene
has been rising and as the production of kerosene in the country falls short of our
requirements, large quantities have to be imported. It is necessary to slow down the
rate of increase in use of kerosene, particularly superior kerosene and with this in
view I propose to increase duty on it by about 46 per cent, raising the incidence of
duty to Rs.95.55 per kilolitre. This, with the existing additional duty of Rs.4.45 will
mean a total duty of Rs.100 per kilolitre. Inferior kerosene which is generally used in
rural areas, is being exempted from this increase by a notification. Additional revenue
from this will be Rs.2.84 crores.
Because of the high difference in duty between refined diesel oil and diesel oil
not otherwise specified, there is a growing tendency to use the latter in admixture with
the former. Partly to correct this imbalance, I propose to raise the duty on diesel oil
not otherwise specified by Rs.28.15 per metric tonne. This will give a revenue of
Rs.1.33 crores.
82. The rayon yarn industry is in a buoyant condition and is earning
substantial profits. I propose to step up the duty on yarn of all categories and on
staple fibre by about two-thirds. This measure is expected to yield an additional
revenue of Rs.1.69 crores.
I am also increasing the duty on vegetable product by Rs.2.80 per quintal, that
is 100 kilograms. This is expected to yield an additional revenue of Rs.80 lakhs a year.
Paints and varnishes and paper industry are now firmly established and these
commodities are in a position to contribute further to the exchequer. I propose to raise
19

the duty on paints and varnishes by about 25 per cent and on paper and paper-boards
by 36 per cent to 59 per cent. I do not, however, propose any increase in the duty on
printing and writing paper. The additional revenue from paints and varnishes and from
paper and paper-boards is estimated at Rs.30 lakhs and Rs.2.37 crores respectively.
83. The large gap in the rates of duty on fine and medium ‘A’ varieties of
cotton fabrics has resulted in a major shift in production from fine to medium ‘A’
cloth. To correct this to some extent, 1 propose to raise the basic duty on medium W
grey fabrics by 25 per cent. The excise ‘levy on processed cloth is also being increased
by small amounts. These measures are expected to yield Rs.4.72 crores.
The concession which is given at present to small units in the form of total
exemption from duty or duty at a reduced rate in respect of units employing less than
a specified number of power looms has led to abuses and difficulties in administration.
To remedy this, full exemption will be admissible only to such units as do not employ
more than 2 looms in respect of cotton, rayon and silk fabrics and one loom in respect
of woollen fabrics. The slab rates of compounded levy are also being adjusted suitably.
84. It is in the interest of development of match industry in the country that
only one size of match box should be produced for general use and the size considered
most suitable is a box of 50 sticks. To encourage this standardisation through fiscal
measures rather than compulsion, I propose to make certain changes in the pattern of
duty on matches. The ceiling rate of duty is proposed to be revised from 57 nP per
1000 sticks to 65 nP per 1000 sticks. The rates of duty on the standard boxes of 50
will, however, be kept almost at the present level and the increased rate will affect
only matches packed in non-standard boxes. At the same time, as a measure of
encouragement to the cottage sector of the industry which uses bamboo for making
splints, the concessional rates are being further liberalised. These proposals are not
likely to result in any appreciable change in revenue. To give sufficient time to the
industry to adjust itself to the new requirements it is proposed to continue the present
concessional rates on boxes of 40s and 60s for a further period of 3 months.
85. Medium and small size factories producing cycle rims which were mostly
dependent on replacement market for disposal of their products are having a difficult
time. Consistently with our policy to help smaller units, I propose to grant certain
concessions which will give relief to the extent of Rs.10 lakh s a year to them.
86. With the industrial expansion in the country it is now possible to spread
the excise net wider. I propose to impose small specific duties on soda ash, caustic
soda and glycerine, a duty of 15 per cent ad valorem on coal tar dyes, of 10 per cent
on patent or proprietary medicines not containing alcohol and of 25 per cent on certain
articles of cosmetic and toilet preparations. Patent and proprietary medicines containing
alcohol are already subject to duty under the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise
Duties) Act. These items taken together are expected to yield an annual revenue of
Rs.1.8 crores.
20

Similarly it is proposed to levy a duty of 20 per cent ad valorem on cellophane
and on plastic powders and other semi-finished plastic material. I expect a revenue of
about Rs.50 lakhs from these.
87. It is proposed to levy a small specific duty on mill-made cotton and woollen
yarn and I hope that at least a part of the duty will be absorbed in the cost of
manufacture. This step will also bring within the excise net hosiery and certain other
fabrics which do not bear any duty at present. This duty will not, however, apply to
yarn in hanks used in weaving on handlooms such as dhoties, sarees and other common
varieties of cloth and to yarn spun from shoddy wool used in the fabrication of coarse
articles. I expect a revenue of Rs.5.55 crores from this levy.
88. My next proposal is to levy excise duties ranging from 5 per cent ad
valorem to 15 per cent ad valorem on glass and glassware and China and porcelainware
including crockery. Provision is being made for a lower rate of duty for laboratory
glassware used mostly in educational or research institutions. The revenue from these
two items taken together is estimated at Rs.1.60 crores.
The House will recall that last year a duty was levied on aluminium in certain
forms. I now propose to place two other non-ferrous metals, namely, copper and zinc,
which can to some extent substitute aluminium, on the same footing, and am accordingly
levying a duty of Rs.300 per metric tonne m sheets and circles and 10 per cent ad
valorem on pipes and tubes. I also propose to bring aluminium pipes and tubes in line
with those of copper and zinc. This proposal is estimated to yield a revenue of about
Rs.80 lakhs.
89. I also propose to levy a duty on wireless receiving sets, air conditioning
machinery and refrigerators. The duty on air-conditioning machinery and refrigerators
is proposed to be levied at 20 per cent. In the case of wireless receiving sets I propose
a ceiling rate of 20 per cent ad valorem for sets valued at more than Rs.300 each and
concessional rates for cheaper sets, these valued upto Rs.150 each will be completely
exempted from duty. I expect a revenue yield of Rs.83 lakhs from these sources.
90. My last proposal under this head is to put an additional excise duty on
mill-made silk fabrics in lieu of sales tax levied on such fabrics by the States. The
States have agreed to this proposal.
91. The net effect of all these proposals is an additional revenue of Rs.30.90
crores of which Rs.2.3 crores will accrue to the States, as their share.
DIRECT TAXES
92. I am proposing only one change in the rate structure of personal income
tax. At present earned income is taxed at a concessional rate through a scheme of
differential rates of surcharges under which earned income above Rs.1 lakh bears a
lower surcharge of 5 per cent while the whole of unearned income bears a special
21

surcharge of 15 per cent of the basic income tax and super tax. The maximum slab
rate of tax, including surcharge, on unearned income is thus 84 per cent while it is 77
per cent in the case of earned income above Rs.1 lakh. The justification for a different
treatment in favour of earned income, however, diminishes as the income and with it
the capacity to pay increase and I consider that earned incomes above Rs.1 lakh
should be subjected to tax at a rate nearer to that at which unearned income is taxed.
Accordingly, I propose to increase the rate of the present special surcharge of 5 per
cent on earned income above Rs.1 lakh to 10 per cent of the basic tax.
93. I have proposed a few changes with regard to the taxation of companies
in order to rationalise the present tax structure, and to encourage capital formation.
We are encouraging companies to have a wide equity base. Capitalisation of reserves
and of premium on shares is an important device to ensure that a company does not
dissipate its reserves through higher dividends. The super-tax payable by companies
on bonus issues has, it would appear from recent experience, discouraged this process.
Now that the tax on excess dividends has been abolished, I consider it desirable both
from the revenue point of view and from the point of view of widening the equity base
of companies to reduce the tax on new bonus issues from 30 per cent to 121 per cent.
The Controllerof Capital issues will, however, continue to ensure that bonus issues
are not sanctioned except after a careful scrutiny of the proposals.
94. My next proposal relates to the rate of super-tax payable by companies on
dividends received by them. Under the law as it stands, there is a concessional rate of
super-tax on dividends received by a parent company from its subsidiary, while
inter-corporate investment on a minority basis is taxed at a higher rate. I feel that we
should not, through our tax laws, encourage the formation of subsidiaries. Consistently
with our broad social objectives, our tax laws should help to enlarge rather than
restrict the scope for public participation in all joint-stock companies. I have one more
consideration in mind. Because of the more favourable treatment given to income
derived from subsidiaries, foreign investors in Indian companies are tempted to ask
for a majority holding. The tax on a minority share-holding by a foreign company is
substantially higher than on an Indian company with a minority investment. The
investment of foreign capital can make a major contribution to our programmes of
industrial development. We do not, rightly give any tax concessions to the foreign
investor as such. At the same time, we should not impose a higher tax on inter-corporate
investment from outside which comes in with government’s approval than on similar
Indian investment. Having regard to all these considerations, I propose that the rate of
super-tax on dividends paid on inter-corporate investment, whether Indian or foreign,
and whether on a majority basis or a minority basis, should be fixed at 20 per cent. In
order that this change does not affect investments already made under different
assumptions, the new rate of taxation will apply to investment in companies formed
after 1st April, 1961.
22

95. My other proposal relates to the taxation of royalties received from Indian
enterprises by foreign companies. The present rate, inclusive of income-tax and
super-tax, comes to 63 per cent, which, it appears, is higher than the rate in any other
country. The incidence of this high rate of tax is borne in the last analysis by our own
industry because the foreign interest concerned naturally asks for a rate of royalty
which would give an adequate return to it after deduction of taxes in order to enable
Indian industry to secure technical collaboration on more favourable terms, I propose
to reduce the tax on royalties payable on agreements approved by the Central
Government after the 31st March, 1961, to 50 per cent.
96. During recent years, there has been a growing tendency on the part of
companies and their directors and executives to entertain on a lavish scale at the
expense of companies. While a certain amount of entertainment is unavoidable and
indeed necessary in the interest of the business of the company, such expenditure
quite often is out of all proportion to the benefit to the company. This ostentation and
extravagance have an unhealthy effect on the society and go ill with the need for
economy and our ideal of social equality. This state of affairs is partly facilitated by
the fact that such expenses are counted as business expenditure for the purpose of tax.
In order to correct the situation, without penalising expenditure on a, reasonable scale,
I have proposed that entertainment expenses in the case of companies should be
admissible within specified limits as expenditure for the purpose of tax.
97. I shall now briefly refer to the more important of the amendments which
I have proposed in the income Tax Act. At present development rebate is allowed at
the rate of 40 per cent of the cost in the case of a ship and at the rate of 25 per cent
in the case of other plant or machinery. It is proposed to reduce the rate of 25 per cent
to 20 per cent in the case of machinery or plant installed after the 31st March, 1961.
The development rebate of 40 per cent in the case of a ship will continue unaffected.
I also propose that where a company is amalgamated with another company or where
a firm is converted into a private company and machinery or plant on which
development rebate is admissible to the predecessor is transferred, the development
rebate already allowed in respect of the asset transferred will not be withdrawn and
any unutilised portion of the rebate will be available to the successor company, subject
to appropriate conditions.
98. The period of tax exemption for foreign technicians, where contracts of
service have been approved by the Central Government, varies between 24 and 36
months at present. It isproposed to make such exemption available for a uniform
period of 36 months. Further, if after this period of thirty six months, the technician’s
services are retained in India and the employer pays tax on the technician’s salary, the
amount paid as tax by the employer will not be treated as part of the employee’s
income. This concession is proposed to be given for a period of 24 months after the
expiry of the initial tax-free period of 36 months. Both these concessions will apply
23

automatically to technicians whose contracts have been approved under the existing
regulation.
99. Another amendment authorises public financial institutions, approved
by Government, which have been set up to promote industrial development by
providing long-term finance, to claim as a deduction, appropriations made to a special
reserve account, of sums not exceeding 10 per cent of the total income of each year
till the amount carried to the reserve account becomes equal to the paid-up capital
of the institution.
100. Honourable Members will be interested in another proposal which seeks
to extend the benefit of the 5 years’ tax holiday provided under section 15C of the
Income Tax Act to newly started hotels which satisfy certain conditions. The object of
this concession is to provide all incentive for the building of hotels which are intended
to cater mainly to the tourist traffic earning foreign exchange.
101. In order to stimulate construction of housing for the use of persons in low
income group, I propose to provide for a deduction of Rs.600 per annum from the
annual value of new residential units completed after 31st March, 1961. This concession
will be available for a period of three years only from the date of completion. Further,
I propose to provide for an initial depreciation allowance of 20 per cent to business
undertakings for premises constructed by them for their employees drawing not more
than Rs.200 per month.
102. I shall not take the time of the House in dilating upon the remaining
amendments to the income Tax Act as these are of a minor nature and have no revenue
significance.
103. The changes in direct taxes will bring in an additional revenue of
Rs.3 crores.
NET EFFECT OF THE PROPOSALS
104. I may briefly state the net result of my proposals. The changes in the
Customs duties will yield an additional revenue of Rs.29.27 crores. Excluding the
amount of Rs.2.3 crores transferable to the States, Union Excise duties will bring in
Rs.28.6 crores. The minor changes in income Tax and Corporation Tax are expected
to yield an income of Rs.3 crores. As a result of these proposals, an additional revenue
of Rs.60.87 crores will accrue to the Centre. This will completely wipe out the revenue
deficit and give a nominal revenue surplus of Rs.27 lakhs. The overall deficit will
consequentially be reduced from Rs.125 crores to Rs.64 crores and will be met by the
expansion of Treasury Bills.
CONCLUSION
105. The taxation proposals which I have just outlined will, no doubt, impose
an additional burden on the people, though my aim has been to minimise its incidence
24

on the weaker sections of the community. I would, however, have failed in my duty if,
on the threshold of the Third Plan, I had called for a smaller effort. We have set
ourselves the onerous task of raising the standard of living of our people and, of
speedily building up a self-sustaining economy. We are doing this with the willing
consent of the people through democratic processes. There can be no respite from
sweat and sacrifice.
106. Our efforts in mobilising resources for the Second Plan have been
impressive. By raising additional revenue of about Rs.800 crores through fresh taxation
we have, over the five year period, not only met our entire revenue expenditure from
our current income but have also financed capital expenditure to the extent of about
Rs.130 crores from current surpluses. In addition, we have assisted the States by way
of revenue grants of the order of Rs.700 crores, Over and above their share of income
Tax and Union Excise Duties. At the same time, we have kept deficit financing well
within the limits originally envisaged. I venture to submit that these are not insignificant
achievements.
107. Our objectives and targets during the Third Plan are more ambitious.
Throughout the next five years, it must be our endeavour to keep the pressure on
prices under check by raising additional revenues and mobilising savings so as to
ensure that deficit financing is kept within the limit of Rs.550 crores envisaged in the
Draft Outline. We are making a good beginning in this direction, in the first year of
the Plan.
108. We have chosen for ourselves certain social and economic goals. We must
do our utmost to achieve them. This will mean hard work and sacrifices for some time
to come. But there is promise of a rich reward in the shape of higher standards of
living, more employment opportunities and a better socio-economic system. The tasks
that we have undertaken are of great moment for the future of the country. We dare not
falter at this crucial stage.
(FEBRUARY 28, 1961)

25

