SPEECH OF SHRI VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH MINISTER OF
FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1986-87

Sir,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 1986-87.
2.
The Budget is a powerful tool for achieving our socio-economic goals as
laid out in the Plan. Our Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, reminded us not so long
ago:
“Development must be accompanied by equity and social justice - by
removal of social barriers that oppress the weak. This is the essence of
our concept of socialism.
These objectives have guided the formulation of this Budget.
3.
The economic developments in the current year have been described in
detail in the Economic Survey, which was placed in the House earlier this week.
Therefore, I will confine my remarks to a few key features of our economic performance.
4.
Growth in GNP in 1985-86 is expected to be between 4.5 and 5 per cent,
which is close to the target envisaged in the Seventh Five Year Plan. This is a distinct
improvement over the 3.5 per cent growth estimated for 1984-85. In contrast to the
disappointing agricultural performance in 1984-85, when net output is estimated to
have declined by 1 per cent, growth this year is anticipated to be about 3 per cent.
Food grains production had fallen to 146 million tonnes in 1984-85. Despite drought
in several parts of the country, we expect food output to be about 150 million tonnes
in the current year.
5.
After a slow start, industrial production has picked up and the rate of
growth in October and November, 1985 exceeded 8 per cent. For the financial year as
a whole it is expected that the growth rate will be close to 7 per cent. The acceleration
in growth of industrial output largely reflects higher production in the manufacturing
sector, which had shown low rates of growth in the previous three years. It is heartening
that the production response to changes in industrial policy has been positive.
6.
An important priority of the Government is to improve the functioning of
the infrastructure sectors. I am glad to inform the House that in the first ten months,
thermal power generation registered an increase of more than 15 per cent over the
corresponding period of 1984. Railway freight has also recorded a commendable
increase of 9 per cent in the first eight months of this financial year. This is double the
1

annual average rate of increase during the Sixth Plan. Despatches of coal increased by
10 per cent in the first eight months.
7.
The increase in the Wholesale Price Index in the current year upto 8th
February, 1986, was 3.4 per cent as against 5.4 per cent last year. Among items of
particular interest to the consumer, the largest increase in wholesale prices has taken
place in wheat, pulses, fruits and vegetables, eggs, fish, meat, sugar and gur. On the
other hand, prices of rice, condiments and spices, tea, coffee and edible oils have
remained stable or have actually declined.
8.
The House will recall that the last Budget ushered in major reforms in our
system of direct taxes. At that time, many a prophets of doom had prophesied that
revenues will fall and buoyancy of the tax system, such as it was, will be further
eroded. Exactly the opposite has happened. Collections from major taxes have increased
by 22 per cent over the previous year, which is the highest increase in a decade.
Collections have also exceeded Budget Estimates by a large margin. What is even
more pertinent is the 36 per cent increase (over Budget Estimates) in personal income
taxes. In the current year, we have succeeded in reversing the declining trend in the
ratio of direct taxes to GNP.
9.
This is a testimony to the soundness of our strategy of increasing revenue
yields through a combination of reasonable rates, simpler procedures and strong
enforcement of tax laws. We have raised more from the rich by way of income-tax,
and not less. The proof of fiscal policy is, not in empty theorising, but in the revenue
that it generates.
10. The Government has launched an intensive drive against smugglers, black
marketeers and tax evaders. There cannot, and will not, be a compromise on this
score. Those who abuse the nation’s trust must be dealt with firmly and with full force
of the law. Considerable success has already been achieved in curbing the growth of
black money, and Government will spare no effort to root out this evil.
11. However, I do not propose to dwell only on the strong points of our
economic performance. I would like to take this opportunity to highlight some of the
policy issues and to seek the advice and support of this august House in coming to
grips with them. Let me, therefore, share with you a short list of key problem areas on
which we, in the Government and the Parliament, must take urgent action, both through
this budget and by other means.
12. The budget is now under severe pressure to meet the growing burden of
expenditure on account of interest payments, defence, subsidies and assistance to
States. An important issue before us is to find sufficient resources for financing the
public sector Plan. This is not a partisan issue or the problem of a particular Government
in power and I believe that a frank debate is essential for the long term economic
health of our nation. In a nutshell, the core of the problem is simply that internal
2

generation in public sector enterprises is not measuring up to the task of financing a
Plan of the size that is essential for our development.
13. The severity of the problem can be illustrated by the experience of the
current year. The Seventh Plan visualises that 53 per cent of the Central Plan will be
financed through resources of public enterprises, and 47 per cent will be financed
through the budget. In the first year of the Plan, in view of the paucity of internal
resources, the budget had to finance 66 per cent of the Central Plan, and not 47 per
cent. We have been successful in increasing tax revenues sharply, and beyond Plan
targets. But higher revenues have been more than offset by increase in food and fertiliser
subsidies and assistance to States. The higher budgetary support to the Plan, therefore,
had to come from additional domestic borrowings and higher level of deficit financing.
14. Collectively, we must address ourselves to the basic issue of raising
resources for the Plan without fuelling the fires of inflation. The Plan is not something
abstract. It is more schools, more roads, more irrigation, more jobs, in a word, more
development. It embodies the hopes and aspirations of our people for a better future.
We cannot slacken our efforts to implement it fully.
15. Public sector has a key role in bringing about the transformation of our
economic structure. We must work hard to strengthen it. A number of public sector units
in this country are functioning very efficiently and producing surpluses for reinvestment.
These units provide irrefutable evidence that the public sector can perform as well as the
best, given the right set of circumstances. Unfortunately, there are also a number of
public enterprises whose losses have become a drain on the resources of this nation,
which could have otherwise been used for the greater benefit of the common man.
16. The Government for its part will be taking steps to improve the working
environment of the public sector enterprises, and improve their profitability. But beyond
that, we must involve workers and the management in the task of revitalising the
public sector. This, if any thing, is the need of the hour.
17. We also have to find a way of reducing the non-Plan expenditure, however
painful it may be. Subsidies serve an important social purpose, and constitute a
legitimate charge on society’s resources. However, the question that we must ask
ourselves is: how fast and how far they can be allowed to grow without cutting into
resources for investment in our future. Food and fertilizer subsidies have now reached
Rs.3,700 crores and have increased by over 40 per cent per annum in the last three
years. Even with buoyant tax revenues, this order of increase is simply not sustainable.
At present rates of growth, these subsidies would have reached Rs.14,000 crores by
the end of the Seventh Plan. At this rate, total subsidies would exceed Rs.41,000
crores for the Plan period. This is equal to the entire Central Plan for the first two
years. To put it in another way, this amount would be sufficient to provide one deep
tube-well and one primary school building in each village of the country. The issue is
what balance to strike.
3

18. The Government is initiating a process of thorough review of our
expenditure policies and procedures. We have to cut every rupee of wasteful
expenditure, get more out of every rupee of essential expenditure, and improve
efficiency all round. A full debate on what we can and must do to reduce expenditure
is necessary and I would like to invite the suggestions of the Hon’ble Members on
these issues.
19. There has been a healthy debate in the country regarding the impact of
administered prices on the inflationary situation. When all other prices are changing,
some changes in administered prices are necessary and inevitable. But the Government
accepts the view that as far as possible there is need to stabilise the prices of critical
commodities. In order to clarify the issues involved, and to initiate an open debate on
the appropriate approach, the Government will present a policy paper on administered
prices to Parliament.
20. The balance of payments is another area of concern. As I had pointed out
in my Budget speech last year, some of the factors that have worked in our favour in
the 6th Plan will not operate with the same vigour in the 7th Plan. As anticipated,
growth of oil production, which had shown an increase of 18 million tonnes in the 6th
Plan, has slowed down. The world environment for trade and concessional assistance
continues to remain unfavourable. Against this background, it is essential to strengthen,
further the measures to conserve scarce foreign exchange. In particular, we must pursue
a concerted programme for energy conservation, and develop indigenous sources of
energy. In the current year alone we are likely to pay nearly Rs.1,100 crores more for
oil imports. The net foreign exchange outlay on this account may exceed Rs.4,600
crores as against about Rs.3,500 crores in the previous year. Can we afford this?
21. In order to overcome domestic shortages, we also had to import large
quantities of sugar and edible oils. Policy initiatives have already been taken to
encourage higher domestic production of sugar and edible oils. These have begun to
yield results. The potential for further expansion of output of oilseeds, particularly
minor oilseeds, is immense. Later in my speech, I propose to announce a package of
incentives, which will provide support to domestic cultivators of oilseeds. Our farmers
have responded magnificently to the task of increasing yields and absorbing new
technology. As a result of their effort, we are now self-sufficient in food grains. As
Indiraji so rightly observed:
“In a country where half the national income comes from farming,
agricultural self-reliance is the basis of all self-reliance’’.
22. Export growth is essential to pay for our vital imports without getting into
4 debt trap. The international environment for our exports, however, continues to be
unfavourable with the intensification of protectionist tendencies and a low rate of
growth of the world economy. This makes it all the more necessary that greater impetus
4

is given to industries which have made important contribution to our export effort.
Several step’s were taken in the last budget for export promotion. I shall be carrying
this process further in the current year’s budget. Separately, the Reserve Bank of India
is announcing further liberalisation of pre-shipment credit facilities for exports.
23. The Government will keep external borrowings at prudent levels consistent
with our debt-servicing capacity. Our record in this respect has been enviable. And we
intend to keep it that way.
24. Over the past year, the Government has taken wide ranging steps to
modernise the economy, accelerate industrial growth, encourage more economic scales
of production, upgrade technology and promote rehabilitation of enterprises facing
temporary difficulties. Although the full effect of these recent initiatives will take
time, as I said earlier, these have already had a favourable impact on manufacturing
output. However, overall industrial growth still remains below our full potential. Aside
from further measures to promote overall growth in industrial output and employment,
we have to devote special attention to the domestic capital goods industry. This industry,
has been painstakingly built over decades and makes a valuable contribution to our
self-reliance. It deserves our full support. I shall be making certain proposals in order
to provide further encouragement to the growth of the capital goods industry.
25. Small scale industry has played a vital role in increasing our exports,
generating employment opportunities, and reducing the concentration of economic
power. It has been truly said that “great engines turn on small pivots.” In order to
provide a focal point for coordinating financial assistance to this sector at the apex
level, it is proposed to set up a separate special fund, called the Small Industries
Development Fund in the IDBI. This Fund will also be charged with the responsibility
of providing refinancing assistance for development, expansion and modernisation of
small scale industry. I also propose to announce a new scheme for excise exemption
for small scale industries which should considerably facilitate their growth.
26. Agriculture is at the centre of our development strategy. The quality of
agricultural performance is the single most important factor in reducing the incidence
of poverty in rural areas. Through sustained and prolonged efforts we have become a
surplus producer of wheat. But, as our heavy imports of sugar and edible oils testify,
production of some important crops remains inadequate.
27. Correcting this imbalance in cropping pattern will ease the pressure on
our balance of payments and lead to better use of our agricultural resources. To ensure
that our approach is not ad hoc, we must work towards evolving a longer term policy,
which takes full account of regional differences in yields of different crops. In particular,
the reduction in uncertainty and instability in agricultural prices will provide more
assured incomes for farmers, and thus encourage production response in desired
directions. With a view to providing protection to farmers, last year, a comprehensive
crop insurance scheme was introduced. This year, such a scheme will also be extended
5

to fruit cultivation. As a further step to reduce uncertainty, I am glad to inform the
House that my colleague, the Hon’ble Minister for Agriculture, has already initiated
work on the formulation of a longer term price policy for important crops in consultation
with agricultural experts and scientists.
28. Broad-based agricultural development provides the most effective way of
tackling our central problem of poverty. But we must also recognise that the fruits of
development do not always reach the poorest sections of our society, especially in
regions where agricultural development is lagging. For them the best hope for higher
incomes and better living conditions lies with the major anti-poverty programmes of
Integrated Rural Development Programme, National Rural Employment Programme
and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programmes. These programmes are at
the forefront of our assault on poverty and for many millions they represent the
difference between the despair of destitution and the hope of gainful employment. In
the next year’s Budget, I shall be proposing an increase of nearly 65 per cent in the
allocation for these programmes. The programme for housing for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, announced by me last year is also being strengthened.
29. Many of the programmes for the welfare of the poor and the needy are the
gifts of our late Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi to the nation. It will be a fitting
tribute to her memory to name the new Housing Scheme for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes as INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA”.
30. It is only proper that the banking system, which is the repository of peoples’
savings, should use these savings to further our national objectives, particularly in
respect of poverty alleviation and rural development. I am glad to inform the House
that in the year 1985, the advances of public sector banks to the priority sector reached
43.4 per cent as against the target of 40 per cent. Under the Integrated Rural
Development Programme, banks have advanced loans of Rs.3,100 crores to 16.5 million
persons below the poverty line during the Sixth Plan. In the Seventh Plan, the target
Of the number of beneficiaries is 20 million. Of them, six million will belong to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
31. It is also necessary to use our social banking and insurance infrastructure
for tackling the problem of urban poverty. Rickshaw-pullers, cobblers, washermen,
porters, barbers, hawkers, sweepers and cart-pullers are among the particularly
disadvantaged. The Government proposes to introduce a new scheme which will provide
loans through the banking system with a subsidy component, so that the repayment
burden on beneficiaries is effectively reduced. The scheme will provide for purchase
of equipment and loans for working capital for the self-employed. such as, rickshawpullers, cobblers, washermen, barbers, hawkers and cart-pullers. Details of this scheme
are being worked out in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, and will be
announced separately.
6

32. I also propose to introduce a new Scheme for accident insurance for the
benefit of Municipal sweepers and Railway porters. This scheme, the details of which
will be announced separately by the Life Insurance Corporation, will provide Group
Insurance through the workers’ unions. The Scheme will provide life insurance cover
of Rs.5,000 with a double accident benefit to the members of a union, provided 75 per
cent of the members agree to join the Scheme.
33. In the last Budget, I had introduced a Personal Accident Insurance Social
Security Scheme for the poor families in 100 districts of the country. As the Scheme
has been widely welcomed, I propose to extend it now to 200 districts. The Scheme
will cover the risk of death by accident in respect of earning members of poor families
in rural and urban areas comprising landless labourers, small and marginal farmers,
traditional craftsmen, small traders and others. The entire cost of this scheme is borne
by the Central Government.
34. The true asset of our country is its labour. It was in recognition of this that
last year, I had announced a series of measures for the benefit of industrial and other
workers. These included measures to give workers’ dues the same priority as secured
creditors in the event of closure of companies, the increase in the limit on the salary
or wage on which bonus is payable to employees from Rs.750 per month to Rs.1,600
per month, the introduction of a stock option scheme and increase in the monetary
ceiling on the exempt amount of retrenchment compensation from Rs.20,000 to
Rs.50,000. These proposals were implemented during the year. In addition, the eligibility
limit for bonus payments which was Rs.1,600 earlier was raised to Rs.2,500. We have
also increased the industrial D.A. for public sector employees from Rs.1.30 to Rs.1.65
per point increase in the Consumer Price Index.
35. It is necessary to improve the return that workers and employees earn on
their hard earned savings. I, therefore, propose to increase the interest rate on
contributions to the Provident Fund. The rate of interest on General Provident Fund
for Government employees is being raised from 10.5 per cent to 12 per cent. To
benefit other workers covered by the Employees Provident Fund, Coal Mines Provident
Fund Act and the like, interest on Provident Fund accretions invested in Special Deposits
with Government is being raised from 11 per cent to 12 per cent. The pattern of
investment is also being changed to permit the funds to invest upto 85 per cent of the
accretions in Special Deposits with Government as against the existing limit of 30 per
cent. I also propose to increase the interest rate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent on
Public Provident Fund which is intended for the self-employed persons and those not
covered by other provident fund schemes.
36. The expansion of housing is essential for the welfare of workers and their
families. I, therefore, propose to considerably liberalise the depreciation provisions in
respect of outlays on workers’ housing. Government will encourage all industrial units,
large and small, to pay special attention to this area. The Housing and Urban
7

Development Corporation has been playing an important role in building houses for
economically weaker sections, and providing housing loans at low rates of interest.
The Government will expand assistance to the weaker sections for housing.
37. In view of the role of construction activity in creating employment
opportunities, while meeting an important and universal social need, Government will
consider suggestions for giving a boost to this activity. We have to ensure that housing
scarcity is reduced by increasing the supply and availability of houses. Tax concessions,
which merely increase the demand for houses without increasing their supply, are
unlikely to be helpful. ‘Mere are several financial and non-financial factors inhibiting
construction activity, and it is necessary to have a thorough debate on these. The
Government would welcome suggestions from the Hon’ble Members and the public
on this question.
38. Among developing countries, India has the distinction of having one of
die highest rates of savings. This is a tribute to the habits of hard work and thrift of
our people. An important objective of Government policy in the last few years has
been to provide opportunities for investment of these savings in productive channels,
particularly financial assets. These policies have proved remarkably successful, and
today nearly 65 per cent of household savings are being invested in financial assets as
against only 46 per cent in 1979-80. The household sector accounts for over 80 per
cent of our national savings, and the substantial increase in the holding of financial
assets augurs well for the future development of our financial and capital markets.
39. There is considerable interest among small investors in investing in shares
quoted in the Stock Exchanges with a view to getting the benefit of capital appreciation.
Most, however, lack the necessary expertise and are also subject to exploitation by
unscrupulous elements. In order to provide a channel for such investors, it is proposed
to set up a new Mutual Fund in the public sector as a subsidiary of the Unit Trust of
India. Investment in units of the proposed Mutual Fund would qualify for exemption
of capital gains under Section 54-E of the Income Tax Act, subject to certain conditions.
This will be in addition to the already existing facility of investment in the Units of
the Unit Trust of India.
40. An important innovation to tap people’s savings, particularly rural savings,
for public sector projects was announced by me last year. Public sector companies in
Telecommunications and Power sectors have been permitted to raise funds from the
public through a new series of bonds. These bonds provide an attractive rate of interest,
and are quoted in the Stock Exchange. As a further innovation, in the next year, the
Government will introduce another series of Public Sector Bonds with a tax free
return. In addition, other benefits, such as Wealth Tax exemption will also be available.
I am sure that people will respond enthusiastically to this opportunity for contributing
to the country’s development.
8

41. At this point I would like to refer to a somewhat technical matter, which
nevertheless has an important bearing on the impact of fiscal management on the rest
of the economy. This relates to the measurement of budgetary deficit. The Chakravarty
Committee, which was set up by the Reserve Bank of India to review the working of
the monetary system, has observed that the budgetary deficit, as conventionally defined
in the Budget documents, does not accurately measure the monetary impact of the
Government’s fiscal operations. The Committee has, therefore, recommended that the
budgetary deficit should include changes in the entire RBI credit to the Government,
including changes in RBI’s holding of long dated securities. The Government proposes
to accept, in principle, this recommendation of the Committee. The modalities for
effecting the change in the definition of budgetary deficit will he worked out in
consultation with the Reserve Bank.
42. The Government also proposes to accept the Committee’s recommendation
for setting overall monetary targets, which can be monitored, and which will help
bring about better coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, and make their
overall management more scientific. There are certain technical difficulties in devising
operational rules because of short-run volatility of monetary variables. An exercise to
develop operationally meaningful targets will be undertaken by Government on an
experimental basis in the next year.
43. I shall now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1985-86 and the Budget
Estimates for 1986-87.
44. There were several important developments in regard to Budget Estimates
for Revenue and Expenditure presented by me last year. As I mentioned a little while
ago, tax revenues have exceeded Budget Estimates by a large margin. The Revised
Estimates show an increase of Rs.2476 crores, which is 21 per cent higher than last
years’ tax realisation, and 10 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates for 1985-86.
Direct Taxes will be 15 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates and Income-tax
Collections are expected to be as much as 36 per cent higher. This order of increase
in Direct Tax collections is unprecedented. The Centre’s share of taxes will increase
by 19 per cent over 1984-85 and that of States by 30 per cent. Another heartening
feature of fiscal developments is the sharp increase in Small Savings collections.
These will be 23 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates and 32 per cent more than
the previous year.
45. As regards other receipts, non-tax revenue will be 2 per cent higher and
capital receipts including market borrowings, external assistance and small savings
will show an overall increase of 8 per cent.
46. Taking advantage of buoyancy in tax revenues and satisfactory behaviour
of other economic indicators, including the high level of food stocks, the Government
decided to step up the Central Plan by Rs.1594 crores. The Revised Estimate for the
Central Plan is Rs.20,094 crores as against Budget Estimates of Rs.18,500 crores.
9

Budgetary support for the Central Plan has been stepped up by Rs.1484 crores or by
13 per cent. In the additional allocations, particular care has been taken to provide
adequately for the infrastructure sectors like railways, steel and aluminium on the one
hand and anti-poverty programmes on the other.
47. Several States continued to face problems of resources in the first half of
the current year. A number of steps were taken to help them in overcoming these
problems. I shall refer to them a little later.
48. Coming to non-Plan expenditure, additional provisions amounting to
Rs.440 crores were made for interim relief, liberalised ad hoc bonus, pensionary
benefits, and additional dearness allowance sanctioned to Government employees in
the current year.
49. Defence expenditure is placed at Rs.7862 crores as against Budget Estimate
of Rs.7686 crores. Interest payments are estimated at Rs.7400 crores, which is about
5 per cent higher than the Budged Estimate of Rs.7075 crores.
50. There was, however, substantial increase during the year on account of
food and fertiliser subsidies. The Revised Estimates for these subsidies are Rs.1650
crores and Rs.2050 crores, representing an increase of 50 per cent and 14 per cent
respectively, over the Budget Estimates. Altogether, subsidies will be 24 per cent
higher than the Budget Estimates.
51. The Revised Estimates for total receipts are Rs.46,01 crores as against the
Revised Estimates of expenditure of Rs.50,507 crores, leaving a deficit of Rs.4,490
crores. The Budget deficit is thus expected to be higher than the Budget Estimates.
However, despite this, the rate of growth of money supply in the economy has been
lower than in the previous year. The deficit has been absorbed by the economy without
unduly aggravating the overall liquidity position.
52. In framing next year’s Budget Estimates, my first priority has been to
provide adequately for the Plan. As the House is aware, the Seventh Plan envisages a
total public sector outlay of Rs.1,80,000 crores of which Rs.95,534 crores has been
earmarked for the Central Plan at 1984-85 prices. To finance this order of Central
Plan, as pointed out in the document on Long Term Fiscal Policy, an outlay of about
Rs.18,000 crores at 1984-85 prices was required for 1986-87. At present prices, this is
roughly equivalent to Rs.20,000 crores.
53. The annual Plan discussions conducted by the Planning Commission with
the Ministries, however, revealed that a much higher order of Plan outlay is required
for 1986-87, in order to maintain the momentum of investment in the core public
sector, and accelerate the implementation of and-poverty programmes. It has, therefore,
been decided to allocate Rs.22,300 crores for next year’s Plan. This constitutes a
massive increase of Rs.3,800 crores or 20.5 per cent over the Budget Estimates for
1985-86. Although this is by no means sufficient to fulfil all our needs, I believe that
10

this order of increase will enable us to meet our urgent requirements. Taking the first
two years together, we would have provided over 40 per cent of the Seventh Plan
outlay in real terms at 1984-85 prices. This is substantially better than in the first two
years of the Sixth Plan.
54. I am also happy to inform the House that the total Plan outlay of States,
for 1986-87 has been fixed at Rs.15,880 crores, representing an increase of 21 per
cent over the current year. For the Union Territories, the Plan outlay has been fixed at
Rs.872 crores compared with current year’s level of Rs.640 crores. It is also a matter
of satisfaction to me that the Centre provided substantial additional resources to States
in the current year which has strengthened the financial position of States.
55. Compared with 1984-85, as I mentioned earlier, the States’ share of Central
taxes has gone up by 30 per cent. This reflects the sharp increase that has taken place
in revenue collections as also the increase in the share of States as a result of the
recommendations of the Finance Commission. I am glad that Centre’s efforts to improve
tax collections have also been of substantial benefit to States. There has been a steep
increase in other forms of transfer of resources as well. The States’ share in small
savings has registered an increase of 50 per cent and the Centre’s Plan assistance to
States has increased by 38 per cent. In addition, the Centre has provided Rs.722 crores
as assistance to States for drought and flood relief. A medium-term loan of Rs.1628
crores was also provided to the States in order to clear their overdrafts with the Reserve
Bank of India. I had made it clear that the Overdraft Regulation Scheme would have
to be strictly adhered to in all circumstances and I am glad that the States have
conformed to it. A problem that has bedevilled the fiscal picture for more than a
decade has thus been solved. I should make it clear that this problem will not be
allowed to recur.
56. Taken together, there has been a massive increase of as much as Rs.7542
crores or 51 per cent in Centre’s transfers to States and Union Territories inclusive of
assistance for Central and Centrally sponsored schemes in the current year as compared
with 1984-85. In 1986-87 the budget estimates for total transfers to States on various
counts is estimated at Rs.20708 crores which is 15.4 per cent more than the budget
estimates for 1985-86.
57. Let me now deal with some of the important sectors in which the Annual
Plan for 1986-87 will provide a major thrust. First and foremost, we propose to provide
a quantum jump in the allocations for poverty alleviation programmes. The outlay for
Department of Rural Development for 1986-87 has been fixed at Rs.1851 crores
compared to an approved outlay of Rs.1239 crores for 1985-86 - an increase of nearly
50 per cent. Hon’ble Members will recall that during the current year, Government
had announced schemes for construction of low cost rural houses for Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes and bonded labour, distribution of food grains at a concessional
price to the people in the Integrated Tribal Development Projects, extended coverage
11

under nutrition programme for young children, pregnant women and nursing mothers
and expansion of the coverage of the Rural Landless Employment Guarantee
Programme and the National Rural Employment Programme by allocation of additional
food grains. It is proposed to continue with these programmes during the next year
also. An offtake of about 2 million tonnes of food grains is expected under these
programmes in 1986-87. These programmes are designed to fulfil a commitment made
by our Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
58. Consistent with this Government’s commitment towards the alleviation of
rural poverty, greater emphasis has been laid on programmes which are of direct
benefit to the weaker sections of the society, especially the Scheduled Castes and
Schedules Tribes. The allocations and targets for some of the anti-poverty programmes
in 1986-87 are:(1)

National Rural Employment Programme will generate employment of over
300 million man-days in 1986-87 as compared to 253 million man-days in
the current year. The Centre’s outlay for this programme has been stepped
up from Rs.230 crores in 1985-86 to Rs.443 crores next year - an increase
of 93 per cent.

(2)

The Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme will generate
employment of 264 million man-days next year as compared to 209 million
man-days in the current year. The Central outlay for this Programme for
1986-87 is Rs.633 crores which is 58 per cent higher than the current
year’s budget estimate of Rs.400 crores.

(3)

The Centre’s allocation for Integrated Rural Development and related
beneficiary oriented programmes is Rs.428 crores in 1986-87 as against
Rs.283 crores in the budget estimates in the current year - an increase of
51 per cent. In the first nine months of the current year 15.3 lakh families
were assisted under the Integrated Rural Development Programme of which
6.3 lakh families belonged to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. In the
Seventh Plan, the Integrated Rural Development Programme is expected
to assist nearly 20 million families.

(4)

The outlay for housing schemes for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
and bonded labour is being enhanced from Rs.100 crores to Rs.125 crores.
In 1985-86 projects worth Rs.146 crores involving construction of 1.5
lakh houses have been approved. This important programme will receive
a further boost.

59. The rural water supply continues to be part of the Minimum Needs
Programme as well as Revised 20-Point Programme. At the beginning of the Sixth
Plan there were 2.31 lakh problem villages out of which 1.92 lakh were provided with
at least one safe source of potable water during the Sixth Plan period. In the Seventh
12

Plan, priority will be given to provide drinking water to the remaining 39,000 problem
villages. It is expected that these villages will be covered by 1987-88. A provision of
Rs.317 crores has been made for this purpose in 1986-87.
60. Agriculture and allied sectors enjoy a natural priority in all our development
efforts. The total Central outlay for the concerned Departments has been stepped up
from Rs.2207 crores in the current year to Rs.2838 crores in 1986-87 -an increase of
29 per cent. This includes the outlay on the programmes of rural development, details
of which I have just mentioned. As the Hon’ble Members know, the, Central outlay of
Rs.2838 crores will be in addition to the allocations made by the States for these
sectors in their own Plans.
61. The Fertilizer Plants at Hazira and Thal Vaishet have commenced
production in the current year and will augment the production of nitrogenous fertilizers
considerably. Production of fertilizers in 1986-87 is expected to go up to 6.9 million
tonnes, which is an increase of 21 per cent over die current year. The provisions for
Aonla Project of IIFC0 and Vijaipur Project of National Fertilizers Limited - the other
major Gas based fertiliser projects - next year are Rs.205 crores and Rs.180 crores
respectively.
62. A major thrust in the Seventh Plan is development of Human Resources.
This includes education, sports, youth affairs, health, family welfare, women’s welfare,
environment, art culture and broadcasting. I propose to enhance the outlays for
programmes in this sector from the current year’s level of Rs.1,236 crores to Rs.1,733
crores for 1986-87 -an increase of over 40 per cent.
63. Education, the Hon’ble Members will agree, is the main instrument of
change. Accordingly, I propose to increase the outlay on Education from Rs.221 crores
in the current year to Rs.352 crores for 1986-87. This implies an increase of over 59
per cent.
64. In the field of Education mention may be made of two schemes. It has
been decided to set up Model Schools in every district of the country to provide
education of high quality and excellence. I propose to provide Rs.25 crores in 198687 for this scheme. For providing equal opportunities to the students in the remote and
backward areas in the field of higher education, a National Open University has been
set up for which I have provided Rs.7.5 crores for 1986-87.
65. Radio and television are powerful vehicles for spread of information and
education. Successful implementation of new concepts and special schemes like
dissemination of knowledge in remote areas through Open University are also dependent
on the spread of broadcasting. With a view to enlarging the broadcasting infrastructure,
I propose to step up the outlay for the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in the
current year from Rs.110 crores to Rs.242 crores - an increase of 120 per cent.
13

66. The New Education Policy’ will be presented by the Minister of Human
Resource Development during this Session of Parliament. I believe, the Policy will
give the highest priority to universalisation of primary education and to spread of
adult literacy in 15-35 age-group within the shortest possible time. Stress is also being
laid in the new policy on consolidation of secondary education and on launching a
large programme of employment-oriented vocational education. Besides, scientific
research and training of technical manpower will receive high priority. The Government
is committed to implement the education policy as approved by Parliament.
67. We have adopted the goal of ‘Wealth for All” by the year 2000 A.D. This
is sought to be achieved mainly by expansion of primary health care programmes,
which as Hon’ble Members know, form part of the State Plans. I propose to provide
Rs.200 crores for programmes of the Department of Health during next year, of which
Rs.123 crores will be on programmes for control of communicable diseases. For Family
Welfare programmes I propose to provide Rs.530 crores for 1986-87.
68. Art forms and cultural heritage foster national integration as well as national
development. I, therefore, propose to increase the outlay of the Department of Arts
and Culture from Rs.19 crores for this year to Rs.59 crores for 1986-87 - an increase
of more than 200 per cent. A new scheme is being launched for setting up zonal
cultural centres to highlight the cultural kinships that exist among the States and
people, as part of the composite Indian culture.
69. The Government is deeply concerned about the problems of pollution. A
major scheme - the Ganga Action Plan - has been launched during the current year for
prevention of pollution of river Ganga. This is an inter-disciplinary programme being
implemented by the Central Ganga Authority. The proposed outlay for this scheme for
1986-87 is Rs.52 crores as compared to the current years level of Rs.10 crores. -The
higher provision will cover a large number of action plan schemes covering sewage
treatment to be implemented during 1986-87.
70. The Government has set up the National Wastelands Development Board
with the objective of bringing wastelands under fuel wood and fodder cultivation. I
propose an outlay of Rs.15 crores for this programme for 198687. This will be in
addition to the provision of Rs.20 crores made for social forestry including rural fuel
wood plantation.
71. A necessary feature of development process is the creation of needed
infrastructure facilities in sectors like Coal, Power, Railways, Petroleum and Surface
Transport which constitute the core of the public sector. In the Seventh Plan, the
outlay on infrastructure accounts for Rs.45,649 crores out of the total Central sector
outlay of Rs.95,534 crores, i.e. nearly 48 per cent. I am proposing an outlay of Rs.10,805
crores for 1986-87 as against Rs.8,751 crores in the current year - an increase of 23
per cent - for Departments of Coal, Power, Petroleum & Natural Gas, Railways and
14

Surface Transport taken together. This accounts for 48 per cent of the total Central
sector Plan outlay for 1986-87.
72. The outlay of the Department of Power is being stepped up from Rs.2,090
crores in the current year to Rs.2,575 crores in 1986-87. During the current year, the
capacity for power generation in the country is expected to be augmented by more
than 4,000 MW against the Seventh Plan target of 22,245 MW. Of the additional
capacity likely to be created in the current year, 865 MW will be from the Central
Sector projects. In 1986-87, the installed capacity is expected to further increase by
about 4,000 MW. Thus, the first two years would account for 36 per cent of the Plan
target.
73. The performance of power stations owned by National Thermal Power
Corporation, a Central public sector undertaking, is a matter of satisfaction. In the
first ten months of the current year, these power stations attained a Plant Load Factor
of 67.9 per cent against the national average of 5 1.3 per cent.
74. A notable achievement in the current year is the attainment of criticality
by Stage H of Kalpakkarn Atomic Power Station of 235 MW on August 12, 1985. The
commissioning of this plant marks the complete indigenisation of the technology for
Natural Uranium Heavy Water Reactor. The year also witnessed the commissioning of
one of the largest research reactors in the world - the 100 MW Dhruva - at the Bliablia
Atomic Research Centre. It is also a matter of great pride for us that with the Fast
Breeder Test Reactor at Kalpakkam attaining criticality, we have joined the select
group of countries which have made a major breakthrough in the Fast Breeder
Technology.
75. An important project approved during the year in the power sector is the
Mejia Thermal Power Station of DVC. The project - located in Bankura District of
West Bengal - envisages creation of 630 MW capacity at an estimated cost of Rs.566
crores. It is proposed to set up three power plants, one each at Kawas (Gujarat), Anta
(Rajasthan) and Auraiya (Uttar Pradesh) based on Natural Gas, which together would
create additional capacity of 1,500 MW. An outlay of Rs.100 crores is proposed for
these three projects during 1986-87.
76. Government have decided to set up a Power Finance Corporation. The
Corporation will augment resources for financing of the power projects, including
renovation and modernisation schemes. A provision of Rs.100 crores has been made
for renovation and modernisation in the Annual Plan for 1986-87, out of which Rs.70
crores will be provided for the proposed Corporation.
77. An allocation of Rs.3,300 crores has been made for the Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas for 1986-87. The production target for crude oil for the next
year has been set at 30.21 million tonnes. A sizeable increase in despatches of natural
gas is also anticipated. In 1986-87, the despatches are expected to be Rs.4,677 million
cubic metres which will be 28 per cent more than in the current year.
15

78. In the Indian context, Coal continues to be the most important primary
source of energy. Keeping in view the increasing demand for Coal and the long lead
time associated with development of coal mines, I am increasing the outlay for the
Department of Coal from Rs.1,102 crores in the current year to Rs.1,350 crores in
1986-87 - an increase of nearly 22.5 per cent. The target for production of Coal for
1986-87 has been fixed at 166.80 million tonnes which is 12.30 million tonnes higher
than the anticipated production during the current year.
79. Despite impressive growth in the Transport sector, the capacity of the
entire transportation system continues to fall short of demand. There is also an
immediate need for replacement of the overaged and obsolete assets. Keeping this in
view, a total provision of Rs.3,875 crores has been made for the Ministry of Transport
for 1986-87, inclusive of Rs.2,650 crores for the Railways, separately provided in the
Railway Budget Railways’ freight traffic target for the next year has been fixed at 294
million tonnes - an increase of 17 million tonnes over the target for the current year.
The year also witnessed a remarkable improvement in the utilisation of assets and
financial performance by Railways.
80. For 1986-87, I am proposing an outlay of Rs.1,350 crores for the
Department of Steel which includes Rs.700 crores for the Visakhapatnam Steel Plant.
Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that SAIL which had incurred a loss of
Rs.214.61 crores in 1983-84 has turned the corner. In 1984-85 the Company earned a
nominal profit of Rs.4.24 crores. In the current year, the profits are expected to be
over Rs.100 crores.
81. The outlay for Department of Atomic Energy has been raised from Rs.495
crores to Rs.550 crores and for Department of Space from Rs.165 crores to Rs.217
crores.
82. The proposed outlay for the Department of Telecommunications for 198687 is Rs.915 crores. With a view to improving the operational efficiency of the
Telecommunication network, the Government have decided to set up a public sector
corporation to manage and operate the telephone services of the metropolitan cities of
Bombay and Delhi. This Corporation will also raise funds through the issue of bonds.
83. A scheme for providing self-employment to educated unemployed was
announced by the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, on August 15, 1983.
For 1986-87 a provision of Rs.103 crores has been made for this scheme compared to
Rs.65 crores in the current year - a step up of 58 per cent. For the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission, I am providing Rs.100 crores for 1986-87. In the Seventh
Plan, employment coverage in the Khadi and Village Industries sector is expected to
increase from 37 lakh persons to 50 lakh persons.
84. Tourism promotes understanding and national integration. Tourism is also
an important source of earning foreign exchange for the country. The Seventh Plan
16

outlay on tourism at Rs.139 crores is 93 per cent higher than the outlay for the Sixth
Plan. For 1986-87 an outlay of Rs.26 crores is proposed. With a view to encouraging
tourism, further steps are being taken for improving the tourist infrastructure.
85. The Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that with the priorities assigned
in the annual Plan 1986-87, implementation of the 20-Point Programme will gain
further momentum. Compared to Rs.4,900 crores in the current year, the outlay for
this programme in the Central Plan for 1986-87 will be Rs.5,998 crores - an increase
of more than thousand crores.
86. Coming to non-Plan expenditure, I have provided Rs.8728 crores for
Defence compared to Rs.7,862 crores in the current year. The House will agree with
me that in view of the pressure on our borders, there cannot be any compromise with
our security.
87. Reflecting the increase in market borrowings and small savings
mobilisation for development, interest payments will also increase to Rs.8,750 crores
against Rs.7,400 crores in the current year. I am also making a provision of Rs.1,750
crores for food subsidy and Rs.1,950 crores for fertilizer subsidy and the total of the
two is the same as in the Revised Estimates for the current year. Other non-Plan
expenditure has been kept to the minimum. This includes a lump sum provision of
Rs.300 crores for additional dearness allowance to Government employees.
88. On the receipts side, I have assumed a 17 per cent growth in tax revenues
over current year’s Budget Estimates. In the estimates for non-tax receipts, I have
taken note of the repayment next year of the instalments of Compulsory Deposit
deferred during the current year as well as those falling due next year.
89. Under capital receipts, only a modest increase of 4 per cent has been
assumed under market borrowings over the current year. Small savings collections,
however, are expected to yield 10 percent more than current year’s Revised Estimates
and 36 per cent higher than the current year’s Budget Estimates.
90. The total receipts next year are estimated at Rs.48,767 crores and the total
expenditure at Rs.52,862 crores leaving a gap of Rs.4,095 crores at the existing levels
of taxation.
91.

I shall now turn to my taxation proposals.

PART B
92. In the last year’s Budget I had announced the Government’s intention to
formulate a Long Term Fiscal Policy co-terminus with the Plan. I am glad that the
Government has been able to keep this commitment. The statement of the Government’s
long term fiscal intentions has, I am aware, greatly reduced the speculation and drama
17

that has traditionally surrounded Budgets. I hope Hon’ble Members will agree that the
loss in dramatic content has been more than compensated by the gain in imparting a
stable frame-work, and much greater opportunity for open debate, in relation to
Government’s fiscal policies.
93. A primary thrust of this Budget is to implement the various elements of
the Long Term Fiscal Policy. In particular, I shall be proposing a major overhaul of
our system of excise taxation, which will reduce the cascading effect of multi-point
excise levies and help in reducing costs and prices to consumers. The Budget will
strengthen the development of handlooms, improve the supply of cheaper cloth, and
lower duties on drugs and medicines and certain other articles of interest to consumers.
94. I also propose to liberalise the excise exemptions scheme for small scale
industry, which will encourage growth of this sector and create more employment
opportunities. In order to promote self-reliance and encourage domestic production, I
propose to provide substantial help to domestic production of edible oils and to the
indigenous capital goods industry. Naturally, I shall also be making certain proposals
for raising revenue, the burden of which will fall on the affluent sections of society.
95. I would be brief in setting out my proposals for direct taxes as these have
been discussed in the Long Term Fiscal Policy. We are introducing legislation to give
effect to the following proposals:(1)

A Funding Scheme is being introduced which will replace the scheme for
Investment Allowance. Assessees will be allowed deduction to the extent
of 20 per cent of the profsf these are deposited with the Industrial
Development Bank of India or utilised for purchase of plant and machinery.
Surcharge on companies which was largely being deposited with Industrial
Development Bank of India, is being abolished from assessment year 198788, along with the introduction of the New Funding Scheme.

(2)

Investment Allowance will not be available in respect of plant and
machinery installed after 31.3.1987. The benefit of both investment
allowance and the funding scheme will not be available in the same
assessment year.

(3)

I had earlier proposed in the Long Term Fiscal Policy that, as part of the
reform package, surtax on corporate incomes will not be charged from
assessment year 1987-88. In the interest of revenue, I am postponing giving
effect to this measure by one more year.

(4)

In regard to Capital Gains taxation, the date of determining the cost of
assets is being advanced from 1.1.64 to 1.4.74, and a uniform rate of
deduction at the rate of 50 per cent is being prescribed for long term
capital gains from buildings and lands and 60 per cent from other assets.
Bonds issued by Industrial Development Bank of India and Bonds issued
18

by other notified public sector agencies are also being added to the list of
investments qualifying for exemptions from Capital gains. The limit for
initial deduction is being increased from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.10,000/-. The
present period of one year for purchase of a residential house in a case
where the capital gains arise on sale of an old house is being increased to
2 years.
96. As promised in the Long Term Fiscal Policy Statement, I propose to
introduce a system of allowing depreciation in respect of blocks of assets instead of
the present system of depreciation on individual assets. Simultaneously, I propose to
rationalise the rate structure by reducing the number of rates as also by providing for
depreciation at higher rates so as to ensure that more than 80 per cent of the cost of the
plant and machinery is written off in a period of 4 years or less. This will render
replacement easier and help modernisation. Apart from those items which are eligible
for 100 per cent depreciation in the initial year itself, there are at present different
rates for plant and machinery. I propose to have only two rates of depreciation at 33
1/3 per cent and 50 per cent. Plant and machinery used as anti-pollution devices and
those using indigenous know-how, are proposed to be placed in a block carrying the
higher rate of depreciation of 50 per cent. Buildings meant for low-paid employees of
industrial undertakings will be entitled to depreciation at 20 per cent as against the
general rate of 5 per cent for residential buildings and 10 per cent for non-residential
buildings.
97. It has been brought home to me that of late I am not very popular with
housewives. Their support and sympathy, I cannot afford to lose. Therefore, I propose
to raise the standard deduction from 25 per cent to 30 per cent of salary income. The
ceiling will be increased from Rs.6,000 to Rs.10,000. The measure will benefit 3.5
lakh tax payers in the fixed income group. I am giving this benefit on the condition
that it will be duly passed on to the housewives.
98. While the medical needs of some groups of salary earners are taken care
of by the employers, there is no such provision in the case of other salary earners and
of self-employed persons. In order to provide some relief in respect of medical expenses
by such persons, I propose to allow a deduction out of the total income of such
persons, subject to limits, of the amount spent by them on medical treatment or paid
as premium on medical insurance policies taken by them with the General Insurance
Corporation of India.
99. In line with the Long Term Fiscal Policy another major step being taken
is to empower the Government with a pre-emptive right to purchase properties which
are offered for sale in the market at the price agreed to by the transferer. To begin
with, this provision will apply to properties valued at over Rs.10 lakhs located in
metropolitan cities. An honest seller, wherever he may be, will not be hurt by this
measure. For the rest, it is between them and the Income-Tax Department - and God!
19

100. One of the vexatious problems in Wealth Tax has been the determination
of the market value of assets. In order to eliminate the endless controversy and litigation
arising out of this, we have decided to frame simpler rules for the valuation of assets
such as shares, residential properties, commercial properties, jewellery, etc. and these
will be notified by the end of March, 1986.
101. In the Long Term Fiscal Policy I had announced the intention of the
Government to retain Gift Tax, and review its provisions with a view to rationalising
them. The following amendments are being made in the Gift Tax Act:
(a)

The basic exemption limit will be raised from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.20,000/-.

(b)

Gift tax will be levied at a flat rate of 30 per cent of the value of the
taxable gifts.

(c)

The provision relating to aggregation of gifts.

(d)

Certain exemptions like those relating to National Defence Gold Bonds,
1980, gifts to the spouse, gifts of policies of insurance, gifts in the course
of carrying on a business, etc. and gifts to any other person upto a maximum
of Rs.500/- are being withdrawn.

102. There is at present tax deduction at source from out of winnings derived
from races and lotteries. I propose to tax these windfall profits at a flat rate of 40 per
cent of the gross receipts. The exemption from income of a casual and non-recurring
nature will simultaneously be raised from Rs.1,000 to Rs.5,000. Income from any
winnings from crossword puzzles, card games, other games of any sort or from gambling
or betting of any form or nature whatsoever, races including horse races (other than
income earned by owners of race horses by way of stake money) and winnings from
lotteries will not be aggregated with other incomes. That is to say, losses, if any, from
other business will not be allowed to be set off against winnings from races or lotteries.
It has been said that “whoever plays deep must necessarily lose his money or his
character”. In depriving the lucky winner of his money, I hope I would have contributed
to the building of his character.
103. The above measure along with the withdrawal of certain other tax
concessions in respect of inter-corporate dividends, will net additional revenue of
Rs.54 crores.
104. It is proposed that part of the benefit of tax deduction on export profits
should be allowed to be transferred to the supporting manufacturers. This will help
increase our exports.
105. The Long Term Fiscal Policy recognises the need to widen the tax base
and to bring all persons who have income above taxable limit, into the tax net. For this
purpose, it is necessary to carry out surveys. An amendment is being made to authorise
the Income-tax authorities to collect certain information. We are also taking separate
20

steps to strengthen survey, investigation and prosecution machinery of the Income-tax
Department
106. In the Long Term Fiscal Policy, I had indicated the outline of a National
Deposit Scheme (New Series) for public discussion. I am grateful for the comments
and suggestions received from the general public, experts and also many Hon’ble
Members of Parliament. Suggestions have been received for liberalising its provisions
as well as for making these more restrictive. In view of the importance of this measure.
I have decided to refer this proposal to the Committee on Expenditure Tax for more
intensive examination. I am asking them to submit their report on this aspect by May,
1986.
107. The Long Term Fiscal Policy has also proposed the creation of a Venture
Fund to promote indigenous technology, to be administered by the Industrial
Development Bank of India. It was proposed that as a source of funding this scheme,
a small 5 per cent Research and Development levy will be imposed on all payments
made for purchase of technology from abroad, including royalty payments, lump sum
payments and payments for designs and drawings. A separate Bill to give effect to this
levy will be introduced in Parliament.
108. We also propose to carry out the following amendments:(a)

Investment allowance and depreciation is claimed on the basis of actual
cost. In the past few years a number of companies have been using an
accounting practice of capitalising the entire amount of interest on the
monies borrowed for acquiring of plant and machinery. This artificially
inflates the cost of the assets and the net worth of the company. We are
clarifying that the capitalisation of interest paid or payable will not be
allowed after the asset is first put to use.

(b)

The ceiling of investment in plant and machinery for the small scale sector
is being raised from Rs.20 lakhs to Rs.35 lakhs, as mentioned last year
and would be applicable to all cases where the previous year ends after
17th March, 1985. This enhancement will be relevant also for the grant of
investment allowance and for reduction in respect of profits and gains
from newly established small scale industrial undertakings in rural areas.

(c)

There is, at present, a great disparity between persons in receipt of house
rent allowance and those provided with rent free accommodation, the
former being worse off in the matter of payment of taxes. Amendments
are being introduced to do away with this discrimination.

(d)

At present notional income from self-occupied house is being taken into
account for taxes. It is proposed to exempt such notional income.
21

(e)

I propose to rationalise the tax deductible from the gross amount of incomes
earned by way of royalties and fees for technical services by foreign
collaborators at a uniform rate of 30 per cent.

109. We had initiated a simplification exercise in the last Budget which has
been continued this year. It is proposed to bring out a comprehensive new Direct
Taxes Code by June, 1986.
110. The total effect of these proposals will be a revenue loss of Rs.33 crores
and a revenue gain of Rs.54 crores. The net increase in revenue will, therefore, be
Rs.21 crores.
111. I now come to my proposals relating to Indirect Taxes.
112. An important item in our agenda for 1986-87 is to initiate reform in the
system of indirect taxes. The first step was taken in the Winter Session of the Parliament
when new Tariff Bills for Customs and Excise were introduced based on the harmonized
system of classification. The new structure is scientific and international. In the second
stage, the tariff structure with such amendments of duties, as will be carried out in this
Budget, will replace the old ad hoc structure.
113. In excise taxation a vexatious question which has been often encountered
is the taxation of inputs and the cascading effect of this on the value of the final
product. The Long Term Fiscal Policy had stated that the best solution would be to
extend the present system of proforma credit to all exciseable commodities with the
exception of a few sectors with special problems like petroleum, tobacco and textiles.
This scheme, which has been referred as Modified Value Added Tax (MODVAT)
scheme - I shall stress MODVAT, not MADVAT - allows the manufacturer to obtain
instant and complete reimbursement of the excise duty paid on the components and
raw materials.
114. ‘Me MODVAT scheme provides a transparency which discloses the full
taxation on the product and its introduction is an important measure of cost reduction.
Amount of excise duty payable depends upon the value of the final product and the
rate of duty. Introduction of MODVAT will decrease the cost of the final product
considerably through the availability of instant credit of the duties paid on the inputs
and consequential reduction of interest costs.
115. It would be noticed that the MODVAT scheme avoids the payment of
duties on earlier duties paid. The payment of duty drawback will be swifter as the
element of excise duty will be transparent It will, therefore, benefit both the consumers
and exporters.
116. However, in view of the novelty of the scheme, we have to hasten slowly
and implement the MODVAT scheme in stages. As a first measure, I propose to
introduce MODVAT scheme for all goods covered by 37 specified chapters of the
22

Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. The Scheme as a result would cover products of
chemical and allied industries, paints and packaging materials, plastics, glass and
glassware, rubber products, base metals and articles of base metals, machinery and
mechanical appliances including electrical equipments, motor vehicles and certain
miscellaneous manufactured products. This would imply that as long as the input and
the final product are covered by the specified 37 chapters and the final product bears
some duty of excise, credit of duty on the inputs covered by these chapters will be
available.
117. The proforma credit given will cover both excise duty and additional duty
of customs also known as countervailing duty. Set off will also be available for
packaging materials, consumables, paints though these are not strictly raw materials.
Items outside these chapters availing proforma credit and benefits of set off under any
erstwhile schemes would be allowed to continue to get the relief to the extent the
revised tariff headings permit. However, the MODVAT scheme and the erstwhile
schemes to the extent they are continued, will be mutually exclusive.
118. The MODVAT scheme will be in force from 1st March, 1986.
Manufacturers who fulfil the requirement will be able to avail of proforma credit in
respect of the permissible goods which have suffered duty of excise from 1st February,
1986 and are either in the stocks or are received by the manufacturer on or after 1st
March, 1986.
119. As stated earlier, the introduction of MODVAT scheme will result in
considerable reduction in the cost of final product and, therefore, to retain the collection
of excise duties at the earlier level, the rates of duties on the final product have been
suitably adjusted. After accounting for the set off, the duty rates have been rounded to
the nearest step in the new duty structure. While all care has been taken to work out
the incidence of set off benefits, the scheme being a new one, Central Board of Excise
and Customs would take corrective steps wherever anomalies are noted.
120. In respect of Small Scale Industry, the objective of reform is to ensure
that the scheme of concessions is a ladder and not a lid. That is to say, such concessions
should facilitate and encourage healthy growth of the small scale units and prevent
unnecessary fragmentation and bifurcation of units. With this end in view, I propose
to introduce a New Scheme of Excise Concessions for small scale units. The proposed
scheme will considerably enhance the scope of concessions available to the small
scale sector. Under the New Scheme, the full exemption will continue to be available
upto clearances of Rs.7.5 lakhs in a year which account for nearly 85 per cent of the
small scale units in the country.
121. Under the chief existing scheme, excise duty is chargeable in slabs of 25
per cent, 50 per cent or 75 per cent of the duty rate upto a turnover limit of Rs.40
lakhs. After that, full duty is chargeable until turnover reaches Rs.75 lakhs. If a unit
crosses this level it loses the entire exemption. It has been noticed that the present slab
23

rate system has provided strong temptation for small scale units to stay below a
particular limit or to under-state their, actual production. Under the New Scheme, in
respect of clearances in excess of Rs.7.5 lakhs, the excise concession will be available
at a flat rate of 10 percentage points below normal duty, subject to a minimum excise
duty of 5 per cent. This concession will apply upto a turnover limit of Rs.75 lakhs.
Thereafter the unit will pay normal duty but continue to enjoy the concessional rate
on the first 75 lakhs of turnover. However, this concession will be lost when the Unit
has crossed a turnover of Rs.1.5 crores.
122. As a transitional measure and to overcome possible handicap in certain
marginal cases, I am proposing that units in the turnover range of Rs.7.5 lakhs to
Rs.15 lakhs may be allowed to pay concessional excise duty either at a rate of 10
percentage points below the excise duty rate or 25 per cent of the excise duty but not
less than 2.5 per cent. The relief corresponding to this turnover range will also continue
to be available to units with higher turnover for the prescribed period of one year.
123. An important feature of the new scheme is its universal applicability to all
types of exciseable goods with a few exceptions like cosmetics, TV sets, refrigerating
and air-conditioning appliances, etc.
124. A new and major concession which is being allowed to the small scale
sector relates to grant of proforma credit under the MODVAT scheme. We are providing
that proforma credit would be equal to the notional normal duty even when the small
scale unit would have paid only concessional duty.
125. The introduction of this new SSI scheme from 1st March, 1986 will mean
a revenue loss of Rs.75 crores.
126. In the last year’s Budget Special Excise Duty had been removed from as
many as 100 items from the Excise Tariff. I now propose to remove the Special Excise
Duty on the remaining 32 items of the old Tariff.
127. My next set of proposals relate to incentives for greater production of
edible oils. It is well known that the potential of production of oils from rice bran, oil
cakes, cotton seeds, tree oil seeds is not fully exploited. A big thrust to maximise
extraction of such oils, especially edible oils from these sources is proposed to be
accomplished by the following measures:(1)

If minor oils like rice bran oil, mahuwa oil, water melon seed oil, sal seed
oil and mango kernel oil are used by the Vanaspati units in excess of 3 per
cent in the total oil mix, an excise duty relief of Rs.100 per metric tonne
on Vanaspati will be given for each additional percentage point of use of
such minor oils.

(2)

In case cotton seed oil is used in excess of 15 per cent in the total oil mix
for Vanaspati production, a relief of excise duty to the extent of Rs.30/24

per metric tonne of Vanaspati for each additional percentage point of use
will be given. The maximum relief for the use of minor oils and cotton
seed oil together will not exceed Rs.1000 per metric tonne.
(3)

The extent of relief in case of use in soap is being increased to Rs.25/- per
metric tonne for each additional percentage point of minor oils in excess
of 3 per cent of such oils in the total oil mix. The relief now will be
available for 10 additional minor oils apart from the 4 minor oils which
enjoy the concession today at a lower rate.

(4)

The excise duty on solvents is being brought to Nil from the existing
Rs.1050/- per kilo litre.

(5)

Hardened inedible technical oils, fatty acids, soap-stocks and acid oils are
being exempted from excise duty. This measure is expected to reduce
imports and encourage the greater use of minor technical oils.

(6)

Plant and machinery as may be identified by the Department of Civil
Supplies for improving the quality and increasing the production of solvent
extracted oils or oilmeals will be exempted from customs duty or excise
duty, as the case may be.

(7)

It is proposed to provide a cash compensatory support of 10 per cent of
the f.o.b. value of oil meal exports.

128. The poorer sections of our society consume unrefined vegetable oils made
from crushing of domestic oilseeds and it is proper that such oils continue excise duty
free. We do not allow the use of crushed groundnut oil or mustard oil in vanaspati so
that it remains available for direct consumption by the weaker consumers. There is,
however, a production of less than 5 lakh tonnes of refined edible oils which is
consumed by the affluent classes. In general, the prices of these refined oils are even
higher than those of vanaspati and the commercial margins are high. I propose to levy
an excise duty of Rs.1500 per tonne on costly refined edible oils in line with the
excise duty on vanaspati. However, to encourage the production of new refined minor
oils, we propose to exempt from this levy refined oils from soyabean, rice bran, cotton
seed and sunflower.
129. The total revenue gain on account of the excise duty on a few refined
vegetable oils will be Rs.80 crores in a year; while the total revenue loss as a result of
the above described measures would be Rs.82.20 crores. These proposals would,
therefore, be revenue negative to the extent of Rs.2.20 crores.
130. I have to announce the following measures which will help exports and
export production:(1)

Export duty on unmanufactured tobacco has lost its rationale. In order to
provide a competitive edge to the unmanufactured tobacco in the
25

international market and to ensure that the tobacco farmers are able to get
a fair price, I propose to provide total exemption from export duty on this
item.
(2)

Garment industry is poised for rapid development and exports and we
have recently conceded to them drawback rate of 7.5 per cent. In view of
the potential of this industry for exports and employment, it I proposed to
further improve the general drawback rate to 10 per cent.

(3)

It has been a long standing demand of the footwear industry that the
scheme of excise concession to small scale units of footwear production
presently granted to units with 2 HP and 49 workers should be reviewed.’
units in case of footwear are the backbone of the production structure. It
is now proposed to extend the scheme of exemption to small scale industries
to the footwear sector also. In view of the shortage in the availability of
wattle bark to our industry, the import duty has been reduced from 70 per
cent to 40 per valorem. The import duty on leather-shaving blades is
being reduced from an average rate of 72.5 per, 40 per cent.

(4)

Improvement in marine products export earnings will come about by
modernisation of the plants to improve quality of product and also by
moving over to added value product. It is, therefore, proposed to reduce
duty on specified machines used in processing and packaging of marine
products from existing rate of cent to 40 per cent (Basic and Auxiliary).

(5)

We have a potential for development of exports of cigar, cheroots and
cigarilloes. This would require development of production of branded
products which will sell both in the domestic and in the export n is proposed
to do away with the excise duty presently levied on branded cigars, cheroots
and cigarillos. Excise duty on branded Hukka tobacco is also being
abolished. I may confess that total excise collections on these items were
insignificant. Those who cannot afford to smoke cigarettes can now turn
to cigars and cheroots.

(6)

Gem and Jewellery - A reduction of import duty in respect of 74 items of
machines, equipment and too being made from the existing level of 40
per cent to 228 per cent ad valorem to 25 per cent. Arrangements are also
being made to allow export of gem and jewellery through air mail and
parcel post from Bombay and Jaipur.

131. The concessions given in the interest of exports will cost the exchequer
Rs.12.94 crores on the custom and Rs.9 lakhs on the excise side.
132. In the textile sector, considerable relief has already been provided in August,
1985 as part of the implementation of the first stage of Textile Policy. From a review
made by the Department of Textiles, it is observed that the market prices of fibre,
26

blended yarn and fabrics showed a declining trend upto November, 1985, though
increase was noticed in December, 1985 and January, 1986. On the production side,
there has been an increase: production of blended yarn from 129.72 million kilogrammes
during July-December, 1994 to 146.72 million kilogrammes during July-December,
1985. It may, however, take some time to realise the full benefits of the duty reliefs.
Under the ‘Sulabh’ cloth scheme, National Textiles Corporation has been provided
with duty free polyester and production of such cheap blended fabrics would go up to
50 million metres in 1986-87.
133. The Textile Policy also aims at encouraging production of blended fabrics
on handlooms. Government considering a scheme whereby specified handloom
organisations can be provided blended yarn made from duty polyester fibre. For the
present, I propose to fully exempt blended polyester cotton and polyester viscose yarn
w certain polyester content supplied to specified handloom organisations. Duty is also
being fully waived on processing of specified blended fabrics by specified handloom
development organisations.
134. Handloom cess, which is now being collected at the rate of 1.9 paise per
square metre is utilised for development of handlooms. I propose to raise the cess to
2.5 paise per square metre. The revenue gain of Rs.3., from this measure will be
utilised for setting up an Enforcement Machinery to ensure that the items reserved for
handloom sector are not encroached upon by other sectors of the textile industry.
135. I propose to extend exemption from excise duty to cover all shoddy woollen
products. These will include blankets, melton cloth, shoddy shawls and other fabrics.
136. As a measure of relief to the woollen industry, I propose to reduce the
import duty on raw wool from 4C cent to 20 per cent ad valorem. To make up this loss
and also to avoid assessment disputes, I propose to increase import duty on wool
waste and woollen rags from 10 per cent to 20 per cent.
137. As Hon’ble Members are aware, a reduced rate of customs duty of 25 per
cent ad valorem was provided respect of a few sophisticated textile machines in the
year 1983. I propose to continue those reliefs for one more Moreover, in order to
encourage domestic production of certain sophisticated textile machines, I propose to
provide reduced rate of customs duty of 25 per cent ad valorem in respect of components
of such machines. This will involve a loss of Rs.2.74 crores in a year.
138. To protect jute bag industry, I propose to levy duty on synthetic tapes at
the rate of Rs.10 per kilogramme where input duty relief will be available; on other
tapes the duty will be Rs.4 per kilogramme. This will also result revenue gain of Rs.15
crores in a full year.
139. Our review of the earlier reliefs given during 1985 have shown that while
reliefs were passed on by the fibre manufacturers, the blended yarn producers did not
27

do so after an initial period of decline in prices. The prices of blended yarn produced
by many of the important companies has gone up to or near the level prior to the grant
of excise relief. I think it is necessary to establish the principle that if the spirit of
reliefs given in the interest of consumers is not respected, the Government will withdraw
the reliefs. I am reducing the reliefs given to the yarn producers roughly by about 50
per cent. On their future conduct will depend our further response.
140. The Government is also committed to increasing the share of additional
duty (in lieu of sales tax). I propose to raise the additional duty of excise on cotton and
man-made fabrics of value, exceeding Rs.50 per square metre by Rs.2.50 per square
metre. This will yield a revenue of Rs.18 crores for the States.
141. The above proposals will lead to a gain of Rs.55.83 crores in excise duty
and a loss of Rs.2.74 crores in the customs duties.
142. We have received a number of representations from associations of
industries and from the concerned Ministries pointing out the need of certain
rationalisation which are unimportant from the revenue angle but would remove
difficulties for the industry or will bring down the leakage of revenue.
143. Paper industry has been representing that the scheme of relief to the paper
units using at least 50 per cent unconventional raw materials does not encourage the
mills to increase production. In the new scheme which I am proposing all paper mills
whose clearances did not exceed 24,000 tonnes in the previous financial year and
which do not have a bamboo or wood pulp plant will pay duty at the rate of Rs.300,
Rs.650, Rs.1200 and Rs.1500 per metric tonne for the successive slabs respectively.
For paper mills with clearances exceeding 24,000 metric tonnes or larger paper mills
having bamboo or wood pulp plant, the rate of duty will be 10 per cent ad valorem,
plus Rs.850/- per metric tonne. Finer varieties of paper are being excluded from these
reduced rates. These schemes will be in force from Ist April, 1986 and will cost the
exchequer Rs.6 crores in a year.
144. It is proposed to have a single uniform rate of excise duty of 30 per cent
ad valorem in respect of 3 major thermo plastics, namely, Low Density Poly-ethylene,
High Density Poly-ethylene and Poly-propylene. The loss in excise duty would be
Rs.7.24 crores. We are, however, revising the customs duty suitably to make the step
revenue neutral. There will be a revenue gain of Rs.7.52 crores in customs duties.
Engineering plastics are raw materials which will have an increasing use in India. It is
proposed to have a concessional rate of 60 per cent ad valorem of customs duty (Basic
plus Auxiliary) in respect of 4 such specified engineering plastics. The additional duty
of customs as appropriate will, however, continue to be levied. It is also proposed to
provide for uniform rate of excise duty of 35 per cent ad valorem in respect of plates,
sheets, films and foils of plastic materials and these items are being brought under the
general scheme of small scale exemptions.
28

145. In consonance with the Drug Policy, I propose to exempt 23 specified
Drug intermediates from the levy of additional duty of customs, thereby reducing the
total customs duty on these to 110 per cent ad valorem. Revenue sacrifice will be Rs.1
crore.
146. I also propose to exempt additional 41 life saving formulations from excise
duty. This will cost the exchequer Rs.15 crores.
147. The total customs duty on additional five medical equipments of
consumable nature is being abolished. In the last Budget exemptions from customs
duty in excess of 45 per cent was provided in respect of 10 specified items of
sophisticated medical equipments. I propose to enlarge this list substantially by adding
101 items of medical equipments and exempt them from duty in excess of 40 per cent
ad valorem.
148. In order to encourage domestic production of medical equipments, I also
propose to allow a concessional rate of customs duty of 40 per cent ad valorem in
respect of components for manufacture of 15 identified medical equipments.
149. In the 1985 Budget, we had given a total exemption from customs duty in
respect of consumable goods imported for scientific research by public funded research
institutions upto the value of Rs.50,000/-. As a measure to encourage indigenous
research and development effort, I propose to remove the ceiling. The revenue sacrifice
would be Rs.5 crores.
150. These measures will involve a loss of Rs.28.24 crores in excise duties and
Rs.0.48 crore in customs duties.
151. Some of the Other Rationalisations proposed are the following:(a)

I wish to give relief to some items of daily use of the common man. We
are abolishing excise duty on stoves using kerosene and wood. The value
limit of complete excise exemption in case of footwear is being raised
from Rs.30 per pair to Rs.45 per pair. Excise duty is also being abolished
on brushes, combs, umbrellas, chalks and similar other materials.

(b)

The Long Term Fiscal Policy recognises that cesses levied as excise duties
contribute to the multiplicity of taxes. As an endeavour to reduce the
number of these cesses, it has been decided to dispense with the cess on
cotton, copra and vegetable oils. The Ministry of Agriculture will take
appropriate action in the matter. The loss to the exchequer on this account
will be Rs.5.90 crores.

(c)

Ship breaking industry is an important source of scrap for our steel industry.
It is proposed to fix an effective rate of customs duty on ships imported for
breaking up at Rs.1,400/- per LDT and to exempt them from the auxiliary
29

and additional duties of customs. ‘Me effective rate of excise duty of Rs.365
per metric tonne would be available for materials obtained by breaking up
of ships which have suffered the customs duty of Rs.1,400/- per LDT.
(d)

In recognition of the vital role of newspapers, I am reducing import duty
on 4 items of printing equipment. It is my hope that they will not accuse
me of influencing the Press.

152. Some of the other amendments which are being made are the following:(i)

The effective rate of basic customs duty on caustic soda is being fixed at
Rs.3,500/- per metric tonne, and we are exempting it from auxiliary and
additional duties of customs.

(ii)

Import duty in respect of Synthetic Organic Dye stuffs and certain other
Dyes is being increased as a measure of protection, from 100 per cent to
150 per cent ad valorem.

(iii) The effective rate of basic customs duty on PVC resin in being fixed at
Rs.10,500/- per metric tonne.
(iv)

We wish to encourage the production of iodised salt in the interest of
implementation of the National Goitre Control Programme and, therefore,
iodine imported for the production of iodised salt would receive the
concessional rate of import duty of 25 per cent ad valorem.

(v)

Specific rates of excise duty are being introduced for manual typewriters
and leather cloth.

(vi)

The excise duty on marine plywood and aircraft plywood as an antiavoidance measure is being increased from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad
valorem. Effective rates of excise duty for match boxes containing 300
sticks per box are being provided.

(vii) Exemption from excise duty is also being provided in respect of ores, slag
and ash, wood pulp, inorganic chemicals used in manufacture of fertilizers,
clinkers used in the manufacture of cement.
153. These measures will involve a revenue gain of Rs.26.97 crores on the
customs side and a loss of Rs.3.44 crores on the excise side.
154. I will now come to important measures of resource mobilisation. My first
proposal is to rationalise the structure of auxiliary duties of customs. At present, there
are 11 slabs of auxiliary customs duties. While the specific duty on crude petroleum
will remain as at present, it is proposed to reduce the existing 11 slabs into three slabs,
namely, Nil, 25 per cent and 40 per cent. This will give us a revenue gain of Rs.190
crores. However, removal of auxiliary duty from certain GATT bound items would
mean a loss of Rs.9 crores.
30

155. Earlier in my speech, I had referred to the importance of providing adequate
support to our capital goods industry which is pivotal for self reliance. With this end
in view, it is proposed to increase the general machinery rate of basic customs duty by
10 per cent. A similar increase is also being made in the general project rate from 45
per cent to 55 per dent ad valorem.
156. As a complement to this, it is proposed to reduce the import duty on
components of capital goods by 5 per cent. This will ensure that the import duty on
components will now stand at 15 per cent below the import duty on the complete
machines. This differential, as recommended in the Long Term Fiscal Policy, would
go towards greater production of capital machines including computerised numerically
controlled machine tools in India instead of their total imports. While the reduction in
rate on components will lead to a revenue loss of Rs.50 crores, the increase in machinery
rate will give Rs.124 crores and the revision of general project rate Rs.120 crores.
157. In respect of 32 machine tools where domestic production has been
established, the customs duty is being raised to 110 per cent. Again, 91 machine tools
and instruments have been identified where there is negligible domestic production
and it is proposed to reduce import duty on these machines to 35 per cent ad valorern
(basic plus auxiliary). There will be a revenue sacrifice of Rs.9 crores in customs
duties.
158. At present there is a concessional rate of duty on the fuel efficient cars
which comes to about 15 per cent ad valorem or less. As I have mentioned earlier, full
MODYAT will be extended to the automobile industry and the new MODVAT rates
for fuel efficient cars would be 20 per cent ad valorem. I feel that such cars and their
purchasers can bear an increase in the rate of duty by 5 per cent.
159. The current rate of duty for non-fuel efficient cars is around 25 per cent.
The MODVAT rate of such cars would be 30 per cent. It is proposed to increase the
excise duty on non-fuel efficient cars also by 5 per cent so that the final duty would
be 35 per cent. A concession of excise duty was given for non-fuel efficient cars used
as taxis. It is proposed to fix this rate at 30 per cent.
160. Under the new Excise Tariff, both the chassis of the vehicles and the body
building of the motor vehicles are chargeable to excise duty. Fun MODVAT is available
for the chassis to the body builders in the final vehicle. Body building imparts an
added value to the chassis and it is proposed to levy excise duty of 20 per cent on the
final vehicle also.
161. The net gain of the revenue of the above proposals would be Rs.40 crores.
162. The duty incidence on T.V. set has been rather low. Substantial concessions
in customs and excise duties have been given in the past in respect of raw materials
and components for the electronics industry in general. Duty is proposed to be enhanced
31

from Rs.900 to Rs.1,500 per set in respect of colour TV sets of screen size exceeding
36 cms. Ibis proposal will lead to a revenue gain of Rs.48 crores in a year.
163. I also propose to provide for levy of additional duty of customs on TV
sets imported as baggage. This increase would restrict the import of TV sets in baggage
to some extent. The gain in revenue in the customs dudes will be Rs.30 crores in a
year.
164. I propose to increase the duty on air-conditioners and replace the existing
duty by a specific duty to stop evasion. It is proposed to levy a specific rate of duty of
Rs.8000 per air-conditioner upto 1.5 tonne capacity. ‘me rate would be Rs.10,000 per
air-conditioner above 1.5 tonnes and upto 3 tonnes capacity and Rs.15,000 per airconditioner thereafter upto a capacity of 7.5 tonnes. A uniform duty of 60% ad valorern
will now be levied on all parts and accessories of refrigerating and airconditioning
machinery. The duty on compressors for airconditioners would be specific at Rs.4000
per compressor. As we are extending full MODVAT relief to the industry, I propose to
dispense with all end-use exemptions except for Government hospitals. The special
scheme of relief to small scale units in this sector will continue. This measure will
yield revenue of Rs.25 crores.
165. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the Ist March, 1986, will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
166. Apart from the above proposals, I have proposed some amendments in the
Finance Bill seeking to effect some changes in the new Customs and Excise Tariffs.
These changes are based on the feedback we have had from the trade and industry as
well as the field formations since the enactment of these two tariffs and generally seek
to preserve the position that existed under the old tariffs.
167. My proposals in respect of Customs and Excise duties outlined above are
likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.499.92 crores from customs duties and Rs.253.78
crores from excise duties. The concessions and reliefs aggregate Rs.93.11 crores on
the customs side and Rs.193.37 crores on the excise duty. The net additional revenue
from customs duties thus would be Rs.406.81 crores and that from excise duties
Rs.60.41 crores. In the excise dudes, the Centre’s share would be Rs.24.19 crores and
that of States Rs.36.22 crores. In the total net additional yield of Rs.467.22 crores
Centre’s share would be Rs.431.00 crores and that of the States Rs.36.22 crores.
168. I had earlier mentioned that the Budget deficit at the existing rates of
taxes would be Rs.4095 crores. The proposed tax measures, taken together with reliefs,
are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.445 crores to the Centre. This will
leave an uncovered deficit of Rs.3650 crores. In relation to the size of our economy
and the stock of money, the deficit is reasonable and non-inflationary. It is also
significantly lower than last year.
32

169. With this, Mr. Speaker I have come to the end of my task. My principal
priorities in this Budget were to strengthen the public sector, to provide a further
thrust to the anti-poverty programmes, to promote self-reliance, and to provide relief
to the common man. I have provided an increase in the Plan by 20.5 per cent despite
resource constraints. We will be financing over 40 per cent of the Seventh Plan in the
first two years in real terms, which is an achievement in itself. I have increased outlays
for major anti-poverty programmes by nearly 65 per cent in keeping with our socialist
goals. New schemes are being introduced for the benefit of rickshaw pullers, cobblers,
sweepers, porters and others among the urban disadvantaged groups. Interest rates on
Provident Fund contributions is being increased for the benefit of workers and the
self-employed. I have provided tax relief to the fixed income groups. And I have given
incentives for import substitution and export promotion, besides introducing several
measures for rationalisation.
170. This Budget is just one step forward. Finally, in the immortal words of
Mahatma Gandhi:
“In times to come the people will not judge us by the creed we profess, or
the label we wear, or the slogans we shout but by our work, industry,
sacrifice ........”
I commend this Budget to the House.
[28th February, 1986]

33

