SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1973-74

Sir,
I rise to present the Revised Estimates for 1972-73 and the Budget Estimates for
1973-74.
2.
The budget of the Central Government is not merely an exercise in
balancing revenue and expenditure. Its primary role today is to be a major instrument
for the realisation of our basic social and economic objectives. This Government is
firmly committed to accelerated economic growth in a framework of greater social
justice and self-reliance. The budget proposals which I shall present later in my speech
are aimed at achieving these basic objectives. For a proper appreciation of these budget
proposals in the broad context of the strategy for realising these objectives, it is
necessary to bear in mind, as background, the state of the economy in 1972-73 and the
economic prospects for 1973-74. The Economic Survey which was presented to
Parliament a few days ago covers this territory fairly extensively. I shall, therefore, be
brief in describing the salient features of the current economic situation.
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
3.
With the return of refugees to their homeland and the emergence of
Bangladesh as a friendly independent sovereign country, we had hoped that 1972-73
would be a year in which we would devote our entire energy and resources to the
unfinished task of economic and social reconstruction and development. We did
certainly recognise from the beginning that 1972-73 was not going to be an easy year
for the economy. In the course of my budget speech last year, I had pointed out that
while the resilience and the strength displayed by the economy in 1971-72 could give
us confidence, there was little room for complacency. I had at that time warned that
the events of 1971-72 would continue to cast their shadow in 1972-73. The strains and
stresses through which the economy has had to pass in the current year could not,
however, be wholly foreseen at that time.
4.
Once again there was a failure of the monsoon in the summer of 1972
which created severe drought and scarcity conditions in several parts of the country.
This has led to extensive loss of crops, shortage of fodder, and paucity of drinking
water, creating conditions of grave hardship and suffering in parts of the country. The
Government has been deeply concerned over the human suffering resulting from these
unprecedented adverse conditions, in order to meet this challenge a large effort has
been made to provide the maximum resources possible for the relief of those living in
1

the affected areas, and we will have to continue these efforts so long as they are
required. Unfortunately, this is the second year in succession that the production of
food grains during the kharif season suffered a serious set-back. This has adversely
affected the procurement of grain for distribution by Government. The drought has
also adversely affected the production of important commercial crops, such as oil
seeds and raw jute. As a result, imbalances in certain strategic sectors of the economy
producing the basic necessities of life have been magnified.
5.
The abnormal increase in prices that took place in the current year is
basically a reflection of these imbalances. The wholesale prices index during the
period April 1972 to the end of January 1973 registered an increase of 9.1 per cent, as
compared to an increase of 3.7 per cent during the corresponding period of 1971-72.
The rise in the prices of food articles was the crucial factor contributing to the increase
in the index of wholesale prices. I am very conscious of the fact that movements in
prices during the current year have added greatly to the hardships suffered by the
weaker and more vulnerable sections of our society. A major thrust of the policy of
this Government is to reduce these hardships.
6.
I do not intend to describe in detail the measures adopted by the
Government to arrest the price rise and to relieve the distress caused by the drought.
Honourable Members are aware of the determined efforts made by the Central and
State Governments to stand by the people affected by the drought. Whatever resources
in terms of money are required are being made available. The public distribution
system has been strengthened. A country-wise emergency programme was launched to
increase agricultural production in the current rabi season to offset the loss of kharif
output for which Rs.190 crores were made available to the States. On present indications
the production of food grains during the rabi season will register a significant increase,
and I am confident this will result in a reduction of the pressure on prices. As a
precautionary measure the Government has arranged to import about two million tonnes
of food grains during the early part of 1973 at a cost of about Rs.160 crores in foreign
exchange. But there is no scope for complacency. The emerging price trends will have
to be kept under continuous watch. Arrangements for procurement and public
distribution will have to be further strengthened and steamlined.
7.
The events of the current year have brought into sharp focus the continued
heavy dependence of Indian agriculture on the rains. This is a pointed reminder of the
urgent need to expand the area under irrigation and to evolve suitable techniques of
dry farming as essential elements of an agricultural strategy designed to reduce the
instability of crop production. The large scale distress in the drought affected areas
has served to emphasise once again the pressing need for better regional balance, and
evenness in the level of development.
8.
Against this background the sharp acceleration in the rate of growth of
industrial production during the current year is heartening. On present indications the
2

index of industrial production will register an increase of close to 7 per cent over the
year, against an increase of 4.5 per cent in the previous year. But for a continuing
shortage of power, the outcome would have been still more favourable. While a large
number of industries have contributed to industrial recovery, the rapid growth of textiles,
after a decline in the preceding year, was the most important favourable factor. Sustained
growth in industrial production in the coming year will require a more broad based
effort than in the past.
9.
I am glad to say that the export front looks encouraging. Exports increased
by 23 per cent during the first eight months of 1972-73. This is a good performance,
particularly when allowance is made for the uncertainties that have prevailed in
exchange markets during the greater part of the current year. It would be well to
remember, however, that our exports were helped by certain factors whose continuation
cannot be taken for granted. The exports of engineering goods on which we had
Placed high hopes have lost some of their earlier momentum. Some of the principal
factors, like lesser utilisation of external assistance and large payments for imports of
food grains and industrial inputs like iron and steel, oil, and fertilizer, are likely to
exert greater pressure on our foreign exchange reserves. Clearly, foreign exchange is
still a major constraint on our development. If self-reliance is to become a living
reality, there must be a massive increase in our exports, coupled with adequate expansion
in the domestic production of such vital import substitutes as iron and steel and
fertilizers, and increased efforts in exploring indigenous sources of supply of oil. The
behaviour of agricultural production, both of food grains and commercial crops, will
also be a major determinant of the state of our balance of payments.
10. Despite a rapid growth of industrial production and of exports, the growth
of real national income in the current year is likely to be small due mainly to lack of
adequate growth in the agricultural sector. In order to retain a proper perspective of
the situation, it must not be forgotten that fluctuations in national income are not an
uncommon. phenomenon in countries heavily dependent on agriculture. Such
fluctuations must not lead us to draw pessimistic conclusions about the country’s
basic economic health, or its development potential and prospects, which are sound.
11. As the Honourable Members know, the Government, after a careful
assessment of all relevant factors, has fixed the growth target for the Fifth Plan at 5.5
per cent per annum. The criticism is made that this target is too ambitious considering
past trends. I am, however, entirely unable to accept that the target is unrealistic.
Purposeful planning, after all, is not simply an extrapolation of past trends. The political
and economic development of India since independence has belted the gloomy
prophecies of many a distinguished commentator. More than once it has been
demonstrated that the economy and polity of India have the resilence to bear hard
shocks and emerge even stronger. The events of 1971 are an impressive indication of
what can be achieved by collective will properly channelised. The task now before the
nation is to bring a similar sense of discipline, determination, and hard work to bear
on its quest for a better quality of life for the common man and a self-reliant economy.
3

12. The immediate tasks for the economy may be summarised as follows:
Firstly, inflationary pressures have to be contained through a judicious combination of
demand management, increased production of basic wage goods, and the strengthening
of the public distribution system. Secondly, in order to improve growth prospects,
vigorous efforts have to be made to increase the rate of savings and investment. The
third most important task is to achieve greater viability on the external front, which
can only be achieved through higher exports and restraint on imports. Fourthly, there
must be a rapid increase, in employment opportunities, both in rural and urban areas,
to make an adequate dent on the problem of unemployment. Determined efforts are
necessary to reduce disparities in income and consumption. Finally, to secure greater
social justice, programmes designed to provide minimum basic amenities to all citizens
must be expanded in scope and coverage. These are the principal tasks which I have
kept in mind in framing the budget proposals for 1973-74.
REVISED ESTIMATES: 1972-73
13. The set back in the agricultural sector due to the failure of the monsoons
had its inevitable impact on the budgetary position of the Government during the
current year. A sum of Rs.150 crores had to be provided for assistance to States
chiefly for the development of minor irrigation under the emergency agricultural
production programmes. In addition, the provision for short-term loans for seeds,
fertilizers, and pesticides, was raised from Rs.60 crores to Rs.100 crores. Relief
operations had to be organised on a massive scale in all the areas affected by natural
calamities. The provision for assistance to States for relief of natural calamities had to
be stepped up from Rs.75 crores to Rs.220 crores. I feel it will be useful to draw up
more effective plans for dealing with drought and natural calamities which unfortunately
are at present a feature of the Indian economic scene.
14. The Budget made a provision of Rs.720 crores for Central assistance to
States for State Plans. To accelerate the work on certain irrigation and power projects,
and with a view to bridge the gap in Plan resources, it has been decided to step up this
assistance by another Rs.55 crores. In addition, special accommodation by way of
loans continued to be provided to certain States to meet inescapable deficits in their
non-Plan accounts and for specified projects. The Additional burden on the Central
Budget on this account in the current year is likely to be Rs.153 crores. It was necessary
to make this enhanced special accommodation as, otherwise, the resources available
to such States for implementing their Plan would have been reduced.
15. I had mentioned in my budget speech last year that a scheme for liquidation
of overdrafts taken by the States had been evolved in consultation with the Reserve
Bank of India to ensure that overdrafts were not used by States as a mode of financing
their expenditure. The scheme was put into operation with effect from 1st May, 1972
and has worked effectively during the year. I wish to say that we could not have
solved the problem of States’ overdrafts but for the cooperation extended by the State
Governments in this matter. However, this was not achieved without paying a price.
4

The overdrafts to States, amounting to Rs.642 crores at the end of April, 1972, were
cleared by providing ways and means advances and advance release of payments due
to States. A small portion of these ways and means advances has been recovered in the
course of the year and the recovery of the balance amount of Rs.421 crores will be
spread over the next few years. This arrangement really represents the taking over of
the past deficits of State Governments on to the books of the Central Government with
a corresponding adjustment in the books of the State Governments, thus increasing,
though notionally, the deficit in the Central Budget by this same Rs.421 crores.
16. The Defence Expenditure for the current year, now estimated at Rs.1600
crores, shows an increase of Rs.192 crores as compared to the original Budget provision
of Rs.1408 crores. Other commitments contributing to expenditure higher than estimated
in the budget proposals this year are - additional food subsidy to the extent of about
Rs.17 crores, payments on account of the take over of general insurance, coking and
non-coking coal mines and the indian Copper Corporation to the extent of Rs.56
crores, and, Rs.18 crores for rehabilitation assistance to about 8 lakhs people on the
Western front affected by December 1971 war with Pakistan.
17. Honourable Members will, however, be glad to know that we have not
allowed these unforeseen and heavy commitments on account of drought relief and
emergency production programmes to come in the way of Plan expenditure. The Budget
for 1972-73 had provided for a big step-up in the Plan outlay. Taking Central and
Union Territories Plans and assistance to State Plans together, the provision was Rs.2624
crores, which represented an increase of nearly Rs.500 crores over the 1971-72 Plan
provision. I am glad to be able to say that there will not be any material shortfall in
Plan expenditure this year. On the other hand, the Railways’ Plan expenditure for the
year will register an increase of Rs.34 crores over the budget estimates.
18. Special Nutrition Schemes started in 1970-71 for providing supplemental
nutrition to vulnerable sections of the population have gained momentum, and currently
32 lakhs pre-school children and expectant and nursing mothers in urban slums, tribal
areas and rural areas are deriving benefit from them.
19. The scheme for provision of home-sites to workers in rural areas is also
gathering momentum. Central assistance for providing over 2 lakhs house-sites has
already been sanctioned. States are also assured of assistance for Basti, improvement
schemes on the analogy of the Calcutta improvement Scheme.
20. Receipts under income and Corporation taxes are now estimated at Rs.83
crores more than the Budget Estimates. Customs revenue may exceed the Budget
Estimates, by Rs.90 crores. Union Excise duties may, however, show a decline of
Rs.37 crores as compared to the Budget Estimates because production may be affected
on account of prevailing drought conditions and the power shortage.
21. In order to meet the heavy commitments to the States and to mop up the
surplus investible funds of the banks and other financial institutions, we have taken
5

recourse to three additional floatations of market loans during the current year. As a
result, there will be an improvement in the receipts under this head by Rs.263 crores
the realisation being Rs.478 crores, against the provision of Rs.215 crores made in the
original Budget proposals. Collections under the various Small Savings Schemes are
now expected to reach Rs.300 crores, as against Rs.230 crores assumed in the Budget.
22. After taking all these changes into account, the overall budgetary deficit
will still be Rs.550 crores. This figures excludes Rs.421 crores of loans to States for
clearance of their overdrafts till the end of last year. A deficit of this order, despite
large scale additional resource mobilisation, was inescapable due to the extremely
difficult situation caused by the drought and the resultant shortfall in food grains
production involving unexpectedly heavy spending on drought relief and on the
emergency agricultural production programmes.
BUDGET ESTIMATES: 1973-74
23. Let me now turn from a narration of the past to the future. As we leave
behind 1972-73 and turn to 1973-74, our main objective is to fulfil the remaining
commitments of the Fourth Plan and to provide a firm base for the launching of the
Fifth Five Year Plan in 1974-75.
24. In the background of the strong inflationary pressures prevailing in the
economy, it is not easy to reconcile the requirements of growth with the requirements
of stability. However, my general approach has been that the stability to be aimed at
must be the stability of a growing economy. I believe that a solution which seeks
stability by cutting down expenditure which adds to the productive capacity of the
economy is in the long run self-defeating. In an economy where there is considerable
unemployment such an approach would aggravate the inequitable distribution of income
between those who are fully employed and the unemployed. For these reasons the
provisions for development expenditure have been stepped up in the last three years
notwithstanding the severe stresses through which the economy has had to pass in this
period.
25. In 1973-74 a provision of Rs.1924 crores for the Central Plan is being
made which will be Rs.137 crores larger than the 1972-73 Budget provision. In
addition to this, a provision of Rs.810 crores for Central assistance to State Plans is
being made which represents an increase of Rs.35 crores over the 1972-73 provision.
With a Plan provision of Rs.110 crores for Union Territories, the original estimated
requirement for Union Territories for the Fourth Plan will also be fulfilled. The Plan
provision in the Budget next year taking together Central and Union Territories
Plans, as well as Central assistance to State Plans will be Rs.2844 crores as against
Rs.2624 crores in 1972-73.
26. As Honourable Members are aware, a number of significant initiatives
have been taken in the past three years to reorient our approach to the Plan so as to
combine the objective of promoting rapid economic growth with the ideal of securing
6

greater social justice and the well being of the needy and the poor. For this purpose,
in continuation of earlier measures like the nutrition programme for children, rural
water supply schemes, social security benefits for industrial workers, and schemes for
rural employment, an amount of Rs.125 crores was earmarked for a new package of
welfare measures in 1972-73 Budget. Important schemes introduced during 1972-73
were special employment programmes for both educated and uneducated unemployed
- Rs.60 crores, expansion of primary education - Rs.30 crores, slum improvement and
rural home sites - Rs.20 crores, and rural water supply - Rs.15 crores. These schemes
are an essential component of our development strategy of growth, subserving the
cause of social justice. They have now gathered momentum and are yielding beneficial
results. We have, therefore, decided to provide in the 1973-74 Budget the same amount
of Rs.125 crores for continuation of these schemes in the Central Plan.
27. There are a number of ongoing schemes which form the core of the Plan
and provide the necessary infrastructure for our industry and commerce. We have to
find resources for these. The Plan provision for power is being increased from Rs.88
crores this year to Rs.115 crores next year. Provision for increasing production capacity
in the field of fertilizers and chemicals is being fixed at Rs.134 crores, as against
Rs.95 crores in the 1972-73 Plan. Honourable Members will agree with me that an
increased supply of power and of such critical inputs as fertilizers will have a highly
favourable effect on the growth in agriculture and industry.
28. A word would be appropriate here about the Differential interest Rates
Scheme. Honourable Members will recall that on the 25th March last year I made a
policy statement in this House in regard to public sector banks starting a scheme of
lending at a concessional rate of interest for helping certain categories of persons in
the low income brackets in their productive endeavours. The Reserve Bank issued the
guidelines for the scheme in June 1972, and thereafter banks started operating a pilot
scheme. Later, when progress was reviewed it was felt there was need for making
some adjustments in the scheme. After considering all aspects I have decided to
announce the following changes in the scheme.
29. The pilot scheme was confined to 163 industrially backward districts,
excluding those which were covered by the Small Farmers Development Agency and
the Marginal Farmers and Agricultural Labour Schemes. The scheme will now be
applicable to Small Farmers Development Agency/Marginal Farmers and Agricultural
Labour Schemes districts also, and in an will be operated in 265 districts covering
three-fourths of all districts in the country. Institutions for physically handicapped
persons, and orphanages and women’s homes, irrespective of their place of location,
will hereafter be eligible to borrow at the concessional rate, provided the funds thus
obtained by them are used purely for productive schemes, and not for meeting their
normal expenses. In the pilot schemes, the income limit for eligibility had been fixed
at not more than Rs.2,000 per annum per family in urban and semi-urban areas, and
Rs.1,200 per annum per family in the rural areas. I am increasing this limit to Rs.3,000
7

for urban and semi-urban areas, and Rs.2.000 for rural areas. I have also decided to
make a change in regard to the ceilings for loans under the scheme. The ceiling for
working capital loans, which was earlier Rs.500, is now being raised to Rs.1,500, and
for term loans from Rs.2,500 to Rs.5,000. With these liberalisations I hope the scheme
will be able to make a better impact.
30. Despite the progress made by the schemes already initiated for providing
employment, and the efforts made both by Central and State Governments, what has
been done so far has not been commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.
Clearly, this is a field for fresh initiatives and greater concerted effort in the years to
come. Government is particularly concerned about the growing unemployment among
educated persons. In order to make a further dent on this problem it is proposed to
undertake new programmes which will generate employment opportunities for an
additional half a million educated persons in various fields and will at the same time
help in the creation of durable assets, collection and compilation of valuable data, and
training of an adequate number of persons to help in implementing the new programmes
and projects that will be introduced in the Fifth Plan. For this purpose, a provision of
Rs.100 crores has been set apart in 1973-74 Budget. But for the constraint of resources,
I would have been happier to allocate a much larger sum for this purpose.
31. Another significant step which to being taken is the provision of Rs.150
crores for ‘advance action’ on the Fifth Plan. This will ensure that when the Plan is
launched we are in a position to get the benefits of Plan programmes within the Plan
period itself. The next Plan envisages a much larger investment both in agriculture
and key and basic industries, as well as industries producing goods for mass
consumption. If the projected growth rate is to be achieved within the policy framework
of self-reliance it is essential that projects of critical importance to the economy are
completed according to schedule and attain full capacity output within the shortest
possible time. The advance action on the Fifth Plan proposed in the 1973-74 Budget
is designed to facilitate this outcome.
32. In addition to the provisions made in the Budget, resources will also be
available from the internal resources of the public sector enterprises, and by way of
contributions from financial institutions. Such resources are estimated to yield an
additional Rs.518 crores to the Central Plan for next year, thereby raising resources
for the total Central Plan to Rs.2442 crores.
33. The State Plans have made satisfactory progress and for this purpose
wherever necessary the Central Government has been providing help over and above
the Central assistance for State Plans. With the provision of Rs.119 crores in 1973-74
Budget, the total expenditure on special accommodation to States during the Fourth
Plan will be in excess of Rs.800 crores which was the estimate in the original Plan.
The total State and Union Territories Plan outlay as worked out after discussions
between the States, Planning Commission and Finance Ministry will be of the order of
Rs.1914 crores as against Rs.1704 crores during the current year.
8

34. Taking the Central Plan with its internal resources as well as the State and
Union Territories Plans, the total Plan outlay in 1973-74 will be Rs.4356 crores as
against Rs.4011 crores during the current year.
35. On the non-Plan side due care has been taken to restrict the growth of
expenditure to the minimum level. Defence expenditure is retained at the same level
as in current year, namely, Rs.1600 crores. Special accommodation to the States will
be of the order of Rs.119 crores and this should enable them to fulfil their Plan targets.
In addition to this, a sum of Rs.79 crores will be given as loans to States for financing
certain specific projects outside the State Plans. As a precautionary measure I am also
providing Rs.100 crores for assistance to States for meeting expenditure on natural
calamities relief. I shall be a happy man if it is not needed.
36. The report of the Third Pay Commission is yet to be received. Government
share the anxiety of the Honourable Members and of Central Government employees
that the report, when received, should be considered and acted upon expeditiously. In
the absence of the report, it has not been possible to make any specific provision for
meeting the expenditure arising out of recommendations yet to be made. On receipt of
the report, and subsequent to whatever decisions may be taken on its recommendations,
Supplementary Grants to the extent necessary will be taken for the additional
requirements.
37. On the resources side, income-tax and corporation tax at current levels of
taxation, are expected to show an improvement of Rs.80 crores, and Union Excise
Duties Rs.196 crores. Small Savings are continuing to show progress in collections
and are expected to yield Rs.325 crores next year, as compared to Rs.300 crores this
year. Repayments of loans by the States next year will also be higher in view of the
massive loan assistance extended to them this year.
38. I am glad to confirm that the Refugee Relief Levies will be withdrawn
with effect from 1st April, 1973. Necessary legislation for this purpose will be
introduced separately before the end of this financial year.
39. After taking into account the improvement in revenue, the increased outlays
on the Plan, and other commitments, the year 1973-74 will, at the existing levels of
taxation, show a deficit of Rs.335 crores. This figure makes no allowance for
requirements arising out of the coming report of the Pay Commission.
40. Honourable Members, I am sure, will agree with me that in the present
inflationary situation which the economy faces, the size of the deficit must be kept to
a low level. In order to accomplish that, it becomes necessary for me to make proposals
for increased taxation which will reduce this deficit. Now I shall deal with these
proposals.

9

PART B
41. Before describing the tax proposals in detail, I would like to share With
Honourable Members the general considerations underlying these proposals. As I have
already mentioned, in the prevailing inflationary conditions in the country it would
not be prudent to have a large deficit in the Budget. Moreover, there are the inevitable
commitments arising out of the resource requirements for the Fifth Plan. If adequate
resources are to be raised for financing the Fifth Plan, action has to begin in this very
year. I have therefore no alternative but to propose some additions to the tax burden.
42. Both direct taxes and indirect taxes have to contribute to raising resources
for our development. As Honourable Members are aware, the Direct Taxes Enquiry
Committe, under the chairmanship of Shri K. N. Wanchoo, ex- Chief Justice of India,
has made a number of proposals in the field of direct taxation. I have carefully examined
these proposals and am submitting a separate Bill to give effect to such of these
recommendations as are acceptable to the Government. Some of the recommendations
which have a bearing on the raising of resources are being implemented through the
present Budget proposals. In making these proposals I have also taken account of the
Report of the Committee on Taxation of Agricultural Wealth and income headed by
Dr. K. N. Raj.
43. In the present circumstances, there is no escape from using indirect taxes
also to raise additional resources. However, I have taken care that in the process
articles of mass consumption are left untouched. This will become evident as I unfold
my proposals.
DIRECT TAXATION
44. As Honourable Members are no doubt aware, the Committee- on Taxation
of Agricultural Wealth and income has suggested several measures for mobilisation of
resources from the agricultural sector. One of their principal recommendations is that
agricultural income should be taken into account in determining the rate of tax
applicable to non- agricultural income. This will help to reduce sharp disparities in the
tax burden on persons with similar incomes. I consider this recommendation of the
Committee to be well-conceived, and am accepting it. I am therefore making provision
in the budget for aggregation of both the agricultural and non- agricultural components
of a taxpayer’s income for purposes of determining the rates of income-tax that will
apply to the non-agricultural portion in cases where the taxpayer has non- agricultural
income exceeding the exemption limit. For the purpose of determining the rate of
income tax applicable to the non~ agricultural portion of a taxpayer’s income, the first
5,000 rupees of his non-agricultural income will be appropriated to the lowest slab,
which is exempt from tax. The agricultural income will be appropriated to the middle
slabs, and the balance of the non- agricultural income will be appropriated to the
upper slabs of the aggregate income. This scheme of partial integration will apply to
the case of individuals, Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms, association of
persons, bodies of individuals, and artificial juridical persons.
10

45. It is generally recognised that the present system of tax treatment of Hindu
undivided families has encouraged tax avoidance. It is my view that the unintended
tax benefits currently available to Hindu undivided families should, to the extent
possible, be neutralised. I therefore propose to provide separate rate schedules, in
respect of both income-tax and wealth tax, with higher rates applicable to Hindu
undivided families having one or more members with independent income or wealth
exceeding the exemption limit. This is one of the recommendations of the Direct
Taxes Enquiry Committee. It is also proposed to bring the minimum exemption limit
in the case of all Hindu undivided families to the uniform level of Rs.5, 000 applicable
in the case of individuals.
46. Capital gains tax can become a means of avoiding or reducing the burden
of payment of income-tax. At present capital gains arising from the sale or transfer of
capital assets held by a taxpayer for a period exceeding 24 months are entitled to
concessional tax treatment. I propose to extend this period to 60 months. As a result,
only capital assets held by a taxpayer for a period exceeding 60 months will qualify
for concessional tax treatment applicable in relation to long-term capital assets.
47. Where industrial undertakings are required to shift as a result of compulsory
acquisition of land and buildings, I propose to exempt, as a measure of relief, capital
gains arising from the payment of compensation in such cases if the gains are reinvested
for the acquisition of land and buildings for re-establishing the undertakings or starting
new industrial ventures within a period of three years of the acquisition.
48. I also wish to encourage long-term savings through life insurance, and
provident fund contributions. At present, 100 per cent of the first Rs.1,000 of qualifying
savings, plus 50 per cent of the next Rs.4,000, and 40 per cent of the balance is
allowed as deduction in computing taxable income. I propose to allow a deduction
equal to 100 per cent of the first Rs.2,000 of the qualifying savings. The quantum of
deduction in respect of next Rs.3, 000 will continue at the existing rate of 50 per cent
and in respect of the balance at the rate of 49 per cent.
Sports lovers will be glad that donations to approved sports institutions will
qualify for tax-relief in the same manner as donations to charities. I shall be happy if
this leads to improvement in the facilities provided to young, sportsmen.
49. It has been a basic policy of the Government to encourage small and
medium entrepreneurs with comparatively small resources to form public companies.
Towards this objective, I propose to raise the limit up to which a concessional rate of
income tax is applicable in the case of widely-held companies from Rs.50,000 at
present to Rs.1 lakh. Under the existing schedule of rates, closely held companies in
the corporate sector pay income-tax at a concessional rate on the first Rs.10 lakhs of
their industrial profits. I propose to reduce the slab on which the concessional rate is
applicable from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.3 lakhs. It is hoped that this. measure will encourage
conversion of these companies into widely-held companies, and thereby broaden the
base of the ownership of industry.
11

50. At present there is some doubt whether management compensation in
respect of business undertakings or other property the management of which is taken
over by the Government is liable to tax. To set this matter beyond doubt, I intend to
introduce a provision to treat such management compensation as income from business
liable to tax. This will apply retrospectively from the assessment year 1972-73.
51. Under the existing law, income tax is deductible at source from the
payments made by Government, statutory corporations, local authorities and companies,
to contractors in respect of works or labour contracts. I propose to include cooperative
societies also in the category of taxpayers required to deduct tax at source from
payments made by them to contractors.
52. The Credit Guarantee Corporation of India has been formed for the
purposes of guaranteeing advances made by banking companies to the hitherto neglected
sectors of the economy. This is a laudable purpose and I propose to exempt the income
of this Corporation from tax for a period of five years.
53. In my budget speech for 1971-72, I gave notice of Government’s intention
to withdraw the development rebate in respect of ships acquired, or plant and machinery
installed after May 31,1974. In response to the demand that this should be substituted
by other fiscal concessions to impart a continuing momentum to industrial growth in
the country, I had indicated that I would come up with some specific proposals for
encouraging industries in selected sectors and those in backward areas. In pursurance
of this undertaking, I am giving an indication of certain measures which Government
has in mind for this purpose, as also for promotion of research and development, and
exports. I propose to bring necessary legislation in the course of the year to give effect
to these proposals.
54. It is my intention to provide an initial depreciation allowance of 20 per
cent of the cost of machinery and plant installed in selected industries after May 31,
1974. This would provide additional resources to the concerned enterprises in the
early years of their development. A list of the industries to which this will apply is
under consideration.
55. In order to provide a stimulus to investment in backward areas I intend to
accord preferential tax treatment to industries to be set up in such areas after March
31, 1973. Specifically, the intention is to allow a deduction equal to 20 per cent of the
profits derived by an industrial undertaking set up in the backward areas in computing
its taxable profits. This concession will be available for a period of 10 years from the
establishment of the industry. The ceiling on investment eligible for subsidy will also
be raised from Rs.50 lakhs to Rs.1 crore, and the percentage of subsidy will be raised
from 10 per cent to 15 per cent of the investment.
56. I feel it is important to enlarge the area of fiscal incentives for promoting
research and development, particularly in the field of industry. I also feel that inadequate
12

attention to this aspect is retarding the development of indigenous technology and
therefore of self-reliance in industry. At the moment capital expenditure in regard to
scientific research related to the business activity of the taxpayer during three years
immediately preceding the commencement of business is allowed to be written off
against the profits of the year in which the business is commenced. I propose to
extend this concession, covering revenue expenditure, in regard to payment of salaries
to research personnel, and on material inputs, during the pre-investment period. I also
propose to allow a weighted deduction equal to one and one-third the amount paid for
sponsored research and development work, in approved laboratories.
57. Honourable Members will agree with me that it will be a paying proposition
for sizeable development expenditure to be incurred in developing exports, particularly
of non-traditional products. At present expenditure on export market development is
deductible for tax purposes to the extent of 133.3 per cent of actual costs. In view of
the great importance of promoting our exports, I propose to increase the weighted
deduction to 150 per cent in the case of widely held companies.
58. I am very conscious of the need to encourage the increase of employment
in industry so that its growth may be oriented towards labour rather than capital
intensive techniques. We are considering schemes which may serve this purpose.
59. The total additional revenue from the various measures in the field of
direct taxes enumerated by me will be Rs.31 crores in a full year and Rs.18.6 crores
in the year 1973-74, of which the share of the Central Government will be approximately
Rs.14 crores.
INDIRECT TAXATION
60. Sir, in turning to indirect taxes next, I intend to take up Central excises
ahead of customs, in reversal of the normal order of precedence in deference to the
former being the major contributor to our revenues.
EXCISE DUTIES
61. In doing so, I would like first, to refer to the effort I propose to make for
raising revenue on behalf of the States through additional duties of excise. Honourable
Members will recall that this is the third and final year for the fulfilment of our
commitment to the States to raise these duties in lieu of sales tax leviable on three
commodities, namely, sugar, tobacco and textiles, so as to achieve an overall incidence
of 10.8 per cent of the value of their clearances by the end of 1973-74. To reach this
target, I shall have to raise about Rs.25 crores in this Budget. In carrying out this
exercise, I have been faced with considerable difficulty because one of the commodities,
sugar, is at the moment a somewhat sensitive item, and, another namely textiles, does
not seem to offer much scope. That leaves me with no choice but to fall back on the
“old faithful”, cigarettes, to help me out of the predicament. Tobacco has been a much
maligned commodity almost from the days of its discovery. While I would certainly
refrain from adopting any attitude of castigation towards the numerous devotes of the
13

tobacco leaf, I shall be content if those who take pleasure from the use of this weed
will contribute in some higher measure to the national Exchequer.
62. Experience has shown that the existing slab system whereby cigarettes
pay fixed percentages of ad valorem duties depending on the ranges or slabs of value
in which they fall, has been leading to the creation of dead areas in which no brands
of cigarettes can flourish. By the very nature of the scheme there is also an in-built
temptation towards the artificial depression of the values of certain brands which, I
feel, will not only affect their quality but also, in the long run, the revenue from
cigarettes. I, therefore, propose to resort to a more progressive system by adopting the
simple principle that the better a cigarette, the more it pays. Starting with an aggregate
base of 100 per cent ad valorem (for both basic and additional duties) at a value of ten
rupees per thousand, the levy will rise at a steady rate of 5 per cent for every additional
rupee or part thereof in value, till it reaches the present aggregate statutory ceiling of
300 per cent, which, if this. is any consolation to smokers, I do not intend to revise
upward. By suitable inter se adjustments in the basic and additional duties I hope to
raise Rs.32 crores in a full year, of which the major share of Rs.24 crores will go to
the States by way of additional excise duties.
63. I am afraid I cannot, while coming down on the cigarette smoker make
things easier for the pipe smoker or the person who rolls his own cigarettes. I therefore
propose to levy a duty on manufactured smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes,
which will yield about Rs.80 lakhs, of which Rs.22 lakhs will accrue to the. States.
64. I have been concerned over the tendency of certain textile manufacturers
to avoid payment of the legitimate duties on cotton and art silk fabrics by cutting up
good fabrics into smaller pieces of fents and, into pieces of cloth which are euphemistic
ally called rags. I have, as the first step towards curbing this tendency, already revised
the definitions of fents and rags by reducing their length criterion. As the second step
I now propose to increase suitably the duties on fents and, for the first time, prescribe
duties for rags. If these measures do not have the desired effect, it might become
necessary to consider more drastic steps.
65. There have been complaints that the duty incidence on certain blended
fabrics manufactured with an ingredient of cotton is lower than on similar fabrics in
which viscose is used in place of cotton. I propose to remove this disparity.
66. A situation has been created where, because of the total exemption enjoyed
by artificial silk fabrics processed without the aid of power or steam, there is a growing
tendency on the part of some art silk units to resort more and more to processing their
fabrics with non-power operated machines. This cannot be allowed to continue. In
making such fabrics also liable to duty now, I have, however, ensured, in the interests
of equity, that the incidence on them is kept 40 per cent lower than it would be had
power been used.
14

67. The above measures on textiles are expected to yield Rs.3.65 crores of
which about Rs.1 crore will accrue to the States by way of additional excise duties.
68. The combined effect of the proposals detailed so far will net for the States
a total revenue of Rs.25 crores in a full year.
69. With my commitment to the States by way of additional duties thus
fulfilled, I must now, in my continuing search for extra resources, turn to another
commodity that has often come to the help of the Finance Minister in the past. I am
referring to motor spirit. Honourable Members will recall that I had increased steeply
the duty on motor spirit in 1971 with a view to curbing its consumption. Since then,
and as though to give me adequate justification for resorting again to the curbing
mechanism, there has been a pronounced$ spurt in the use of petrol. I propose therefore
to apply the curb and also raise some revenue by increasing the duty on motor spirit
by Rs.80 per kilolitre so as to yield Rs.19.20 crores per year.
70. I also intend to take this opportunity for making a few modifications in
regard to certain petroleum fractions which are classifiable as motor spirit, particularly
raw naphtha, where there is need for economy in its consumption. However, in doing
so, the existing concessions for the use of naphtha in the manufacture of fertilisers, as
also fuel in the manufacture of steel, will be left untouched. These minor modifications
will net an additional revenue of Rs.1.60 crores.
71. When the levy was first imposed on compounded and blended lubricating
oils and greases I had granted relief to the smaller manufacturers by exempting such
products manufactured without the aid of power from duty. I, however, find that
even some of the bigger manufacturers have stepped into a territory not really meant
for them, by changing their production to methods where power is not used so as to
avoid paying duty. Honourable Members will appreciate that I cannot allow such
avoidance to go unquestioned. I, therefore, propose to withdraw the existing criterion
and effectively confine the concession to the smaller manufacturers by prescribing
it on a quantity-slab basis. I also propose to increase the effective rate of duty on
such oils and greases from 13 per cent to 15 per cent. These measures will yield
Rs.2.35 crores.
72. While on this subject of the ingenuity of manufacturers I would like to
mention the parallel instance of nylon yarn spinners who have started adjusting the
denierage of their yarn in a way that will enable them to pay lower duties taking
advantage of the denierage grouping system on the basis of which the rates of duty are
levied. To cite an instance, in the first group where the cut-off point is 30 deniers,
production has shifted to yarn of 31 and 32 deniers, which therefore pays only a lower
duty. I propose to rectify the situation by suitably re-adjusting the existing denier
groups.
15

73. The next measure I propose is meant to facilitate the collection of duty on
synthetic fibres and yarn. This I intend doing by exempting the raw materials, such as
polymer chips, used in such manufacture, from duty and suitably readjusting the duties
on the finished nylon, acetate and polyester yarn and fibres. However, in doing so, I
have ensured that the existing incidence of duty on nylon yarn used in the manufacture
of fishing nets and parachute cords remains unaffected.
74. These measures relating to synthetic yarn and fibres will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.7.85 crores.
75. Keeping in view the need for a higher degree of taxation on luxury articles
used by the more affluent, I propose to increase the duties on a few selected items.
Refrigerators and air-conditioners will pay 60 per cent and their parts, including parts
of their machinery, will pay 75 per cent. The proposed increase on refrigerators will
not, however, affect those of a capacity not exceeding 165 litres which are used by the
middle class consumer. Refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery for industrial
undertakings and public-run hospitals are not being touched. The duty on domestic
electrical appliances, as also on decorative plywood, will be raised to 25 per cent.
However, commercial plywood will pay lower rates of 29 per cent and 15 per cent
depending on the square area of such plywood. Plywood for tea-chests also remains
unaffected. The rest of this list of items consists of motor vehicle parts, instant coffee,
shaving cream and long playing records. The proposed duty on gramophone records
will apply to the more expensive long-playing variety only.
76.

These various measures in the aggregate will yield Rs.8.33 crores.

77. My next proposal is for the addition of a few items to those already in the
excise net, namely caustic potash, carbon black, carbide tool tips, wire ropes, and
certain rubber chemicals. All these, (except carbide tool tips which will pay 20 per
cent), will bear a duty at the normal general rate of 10 per cent that is levied on raw
materials in the Central Excise tariff. Glycerine which has so long been paying specific
duty will also join their number. These levies are expected to yield Rs.3.60 crores.
78. I also propose to modify., enlarge, or rescind a number of concessions
that exist at present. Without cataloguing them in detail, I shall mention a few of each
variety. Some of the existing concessions given for paper mills some years back have
been found to be out-dated. I propose to replace them with certain others aimed at
benefiting future expansions of smaller paper mills and also attracting new capital
investment to the industry. The scope of exemption fixed on a quantitative basis for
paper mills having no bamboo plants attached to them will also be enlarged. The use
of unconventional raw materials like bagasse, and cereal straw, will be further
encouraged by liberalising the existing concession. Among the list of concessions that
are being withdrawn are those relating to certain producers of rayon yarn and to lowvoltage electric motors, sheet glass and plate glass. and glass fibre and yarn. Acrylic
sheets produced out of duty paid plastic materials, and p.v.c. films of specified thickness
16

and layflat tubings produced by the small-scale sector, will be exempted. These diverse
measures will result in an additional revenue of Rs.3.60 crores.
79. Before I go on to deal with customs duties, I would like to make a reference
to a matter which concerns both kinds of duties. Honourable Members are aware that
Parliament has been sanctioning enabling provisions for levy of regulatory duties of
excise and customs on a year to year basis from 1963. Regulatory duties were intended
as special fiscal measures to be resorted to only for certain purposes. I propose to
replace them by new straightforward revenue raising provisions. For certain reasons it
is not possible to incorporate the provisions in rate tariffs, or make them part of
taxation statutes and they would therefore have to be revived from year to year for the
present. The new provisions now proposed levy auxiliary duties both on excisable
goods and imported goods at an amount equal to 20 per cent of the value of such
goods. These levies have however been limited to a level needed to raise resources for
the Centre by granting exemptions wherever and to the extent warranted, for which
suitable provisions have been made in the relevant clauses of the Finance Bill.
80. I shall wind up my catalogue of excise proposals by referring to how I
intend to resort to this provision m the excise side. In the case of aluminium, jute yarn
and jute manufactures, other than hessian, copper and zinc, the auxiliary levies will
continue at the same levels at which they were hitherto charged by way of regulatory
duties. In the case of steel ingots and iron and steel products (other than skelp), however,
the rate will be 75 per cent of the effective basic duty as against 50 per cent hitherto
levied as regulatory duty. This measure in the case of iron and steel is necessary in
order to bring about a further reduction in the gap between imported and indigenous
prices.
81. In the case of steel as well as all other metals, the auxiliary duties will
apply, however, only to indigenous production, and will not be attracted by way of
countervailing duty on imports.
82. While on this subject I would also like to mention a modification I propose
to make in the exemption on steel products produced by electric furnaces. These
secondary steel producing units which are scrap-based are at present enjoying an
exemption of the ingot stage duty on the products made by them. The extent of such
benefit, which was only 75 rupees per metric tonne prior to December 1971, has
nearly doubled since then, and is likely to increase further with the modification now
being made on iron and steel. In the circumstances I propose to impose on furnace
steel a levy of Rs.50 per metric tonne at the ingot stage. This will, of course, be
subject to 75 per cent of this basic duty as auxiliary duty, in the same way as other
steel. I would not consider this impost in any way inequitable, for it still leaves a
considerable advantage in favour of furnace, steel as compared to what the major steel
plants have to pay at the ingot stage.
17

83. These proposals after setting off the revenue that will be foregone by
dropping regulatory duties, will yield Rs.34.60 crores of which Rs.29 crores will
accrue to the Centre.
IMPORT DUTIES
84. It is time now to turn to customs duties where my proposals can be broadly
categorised under three main heads.
85. The first relates to auxiliary duties, which I propose to apply on the Customs
side by means of three differential rates of 20 per cent, 10 per cent and 5 per cent of
the value of imported goods, All those paying an effective customs duty of 100 per
cent ad valorem or more, will pay 29 per cent as auxiliary duties; those paying 60 per
cent ad valorem and more, but less than 100 per cent, will pay 10 per cent; and the rest
of the goods will pay 5 per cent. However, food rains, books, family planning appliances
and a few other selected categories of goods, as well as three other items to which I
shall presently refer, will be totally exempt from auxiliary duties of customs.
86. After making allowance for the revenue that will be foregone by
dropping regulatory duties this measure is expected to bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.36.50 crores.
87. The second proposal is regarding the modification of the rates of duties
presently bound under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Pending renegotiations with the concerned contracting parties we have been permitted to modify
the bound rates under the Agreement to the extent necessary for the rationalisation of
the tariff rate structure. Consequent on this I have decided to revise the rates of duty
on a number of items which among them will include wood pulp, tallow and a few
plastic materials. These revisions of rates are expected to yield an additional Rs.18.70
crores in a full year.
88. My last proposal relating to customs is a selective revision of the existing
rates of duty on a few items.
89. It is necessary to give a further impetus to import substitution and encourage
more extensive manufacture of machinery in our country. I feel that a fiscal incentive
is needed for this purpose which I propose to administer by making an across-theboard increase in the rate of duty on all machinery from the existing level of 30 per
cent to 40 per cent. This will be applied also to certain allied items.
90. Raw cotton has been enjoying a privileged position for a long time with
only a nominal concessional duty of 10 paise per kilogram. Since imported cotton is
used mainly for the production of fine and superfine fabrics and comparatively
expensive varieties of blended fabrics which, in the nature of things, are expected to
be used by the more affluent sections of society, I propose to withdraw this concessional
rate and make raw cotton liable to its 40 per cent statutory rate, which is the normal
level of taxation for raw materials in the Customs Tariff.
18

91. However, raw cotton along with two other items, amely, tallow and
machinery, will not be subjected to auxiliary duties of customs.
92. Copper which has been paying a rate of duty at 30 per cent will pay 40
per cent which is the normal rate applicable to nonferrous metals.
93. Since the margin of profit on stainless steel sheets is considerable, I propose
to raise the rate of duty on them from 100 per cent to 200 per cent. However, the duty
on stainless steel plates and strips will be fixed at a lower rate of 60 per cent.
94. As a measure of assistance to indigenous industry, the concessional rate
of 60 per cent so far applicable to nylon yarn used in tyre manufacture is proposed to
be withdrawn.
95. I also propose to raise the rate of duty on unexposed cinematograph films
from 15 paise to 50 paise per linear metre.
96. These various measures relating. to revisions of rates of customs duties
are expected to yield Rs.97.30 crores in a full year.
97. In addition to this, countervailing duties of customs which will
automatically accrue because of the proposed changes in excise duties will account
for an additional Rs.3.50 crores.
98. To sum up, all the proposals regarding excise and customs duties that I
have listed so far will yield about Rs.274 crores. The measures relating to customs
duties will yield about RS.156 crores. From the excise duties, which will be of the
order of Rs.118 crores, Rs.38 crores will accrue to the States.
99. I may now briefly summarise the revenue implications of the various
proposals that I have outlined earlier in my speech. The additional yield from direct
taxes in 1973-74 will be Rs.18.6 crores. Of this, Rs.4.7 crores will accrue to the
States, leaving Rs.13.9 crores for the Centre. The excise duty proposals will yield
additional revenue worth Rs.118 crores in 1973-74. Of this amount, nearly Rs.38
crores will go to the States and the balance of Rs.80 crores will accrue to the Centre.
The additional revenue from customs duties will amount to Rs.156 crores. In all, the
Central revenues will benefit from the total package of my proposals to the extent of
Rs.250 crores. As a result, the initial deficit of Rs.335 crores estimated at 1972-73 tax
rates will be reduced to Rs.85 crores. This however will be increased by the provision
which will have to be made in connection with the report of the Pay Commission.
100. Sir, before concluding I would like to point out that this is the third regular
budget that I have been privileged to present to this august House. During each of
these budgets, I have had to come forward with proposals for significant amounts of
additional taxation. This was not a pleasant task. It was however inevitable in the light
19

of resources required to meet our basic commitments to the people and the
unprecedented challenges of the difficult times we have lived through. The poverty
and the associated inequalities in income and wealth that prevail in this country cannot
be abolished over night. But there can never be any doubt about the direction in which
the Government is determined to move to sustain people’s faith in our democratic
polity as an effective vehicle of rapid social change. It is in this context of our firm
commitment to socialism, rapid economic growth and a self-reliant economy that the
budget proposals must be appraised. The building-up of a socialist society requires a
sustained multi- dimensional effort to transform our social and economic structure. In
an economy where a large number of people are ill-fed and ill-clothed we cannot
afford the luxury of maintaining the status quo. Fiscal policy must assist in this
process. This is the vision I have kept in mind in formulating this year’s budget.
101. The increased provisions for employment programmes and the continuing
emphasis on selected schemes of social welfare are part of an attempt to reduce the
existing inequalities of income and consumption. The partial integration of agricultural
and non-agricultural income, and the imposition of higher income-tax rates on Hindu
undivided families, are designed to make our tax system more equitable and progressive.
The pattern of proposed additions to indirect taxes will also serve the same purpose.
I have made every effort to ensure that additional levies do not impose an undue
burden on the common man. On the other hand, small savers will benefit positively by
the proposed liberalisation of tax exemptions for contributions to provident funds and
life insurance. The introduction of initial depreciation allowances for selected high
priority industries after 31st May 1974 will strengthen this country’s industrial structure
and thereby help in the realisation of the goal of self-reliance. Concessions for research
and development will further stimulate the growth of indigenous technology and
contribute to self-reliance. The enhancement of the weighted deduction presently
allowed in respect of export market development must also be seen in the con~ of the
nation’s determination to move speedily towards self-reliance. Incentives for
industrialisation of backward areas that I have indicated will help to reduce the existing
regional inequalities in the level of development which are clearly inconsistent with
the ideals of a socialist society. As I see it the budget for 1973-74 represents another
major effort on the part of this Government to get the country moving towards the
goal of an expanding self-reliant economy based on social justice.
(February 28,1973)

20

