SPEECH OF SHRI H.M. PATEL MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1978-79

Sir,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 1978-79.
2.
The Economic Survey has presented a detailed review of the trends in the
Indian economy for the current year. I shall, therefore, refer only briefly to them.
3.
We inherited a highly explosive inflationary situation when we took office.
Prices in 1976-77 went up by over 12 per cent. In a year in which real gross national
product increased by less than 2 per cent, money supply went up by 20 per cent. Thus
at the beginning of 1977-78, the economy was faced with a massive excess of liquidity
which threatened to unleash a fresh bout of inflation. In the early part of the year, our
Government, in the process of honouring its commitments made to the people, withdrew
the compulsory deposit scheme and also restored the statutory bonus of 8.33 per. cent.
These measures no doubt further added to the pressure of demand. Against this
background, it is most gratifying that the economy has been so managed during the
current year as to ensure that the prices did not increase. Hon’ble Members will be
pleased to note that the wholesale price index is today lower than the level inherited
by us from the previous Government.
4.
This relative price stability has been achieved by pursuing an active policy
of supply management and public distribution and a policy of restriction on money
and credit. The issue of cereals and sugar from the public stocks has been liberal.
Large quantities of edible oil, cotton and artificial fibres were imported to make up
domestic shortfalls. Exports of a number of essential commodities were regulated and
export duties were adjusted in order to increase domestic availability. Both
administrative and monetary steps were taken to ensure that speculative hoarding did
not take place and cornered stocks came on to the market. At the same time an active
support programme was pursued with regard to many commodities other than cereals
to ensure incentives for adequate production. We can justifiably claim that significant
progress was made towards evolving an integrated price and distribution policy for
essential commodities.
5.
I derive added satisfaction from the fact that relative price stability has
been maintained against the background of a rapidly expanding economy. The gross
national product will register a satisfactory growth of 5 per cent in the current year
as compared to 1.6 per cent in 1976-77. Agricultural production which had declined
sharply last year is expected to more than make up the lost ground. Foodgrain
1

production is expected to exceed last year’s level by about 10 million tonnes despite
the natural disasters in the South. The production of commercial corps is also expected
to improve considerably.
6.
This result has been achieved in part due to good weather but to an even
greater extent because of the increased irrigation potential, increased use of fertilizers,
pesticides and high yielding variety seeds. Additional irrigation potential created during
the year will be 2.23 million hectares- the highest achieved in a single year so far. The
use of fertilizers is expected to go up by 23 per cent to 4.2 million tonnes. The area
under high yielding variety seeds is expected to increase to nearly 35 million hectares
in 1977-78, an increase of more than 2 million hectares over the previous year. Clearly
the basis now exists for a more dynamic growth of agriculture in the years to come.
7.
The balance of payments continues to be strong. Export growth has,
however, slowed down considerably. Slow growth of the world economy, growing
protectionism, a sharp decline in some commodity prices and a lack of demand for
others account for this. It is important, therefore, that we do not relax in our export
efforts. We should indeed continue to strengthen the export organisation that has been
built up and the image of Indian exports that has been created while simultaneously
improving the competitiveness of our exports further.
8.
The country’s foreign exchange reserves have risen further, despite an
increase in imports, because of continued inward remittances and a small surplus on
trade account. Since reserve accumulations amount to lending abroad, these should be
drawn down and used for internal development by a poor country like India.
9.
A number of steps have been taken to utilise these reserves but the
continued accretion indicates that these are not enough. I, therefore, propose to create
a new facility under which term lending financial institutions and public sector banks
win provide rupee finance on appropriate terms to cover the import costs of approved
projects. This will be in addition to the rupee finance which is already being made
available to cover domestic costs. A consortium of banks will be formed to provide
such loans, supplementing the finance by the term lending institutions.
10. At the same time, I want to dispel the impression that our reserves are so
large that they have to be spent without any real justification. The fluctuations in our
balance of payments arising from swings in agricultural production and in the prices
of some of our essential imports are large, and we do not have a secondary line of
reserves as the developed countries have. A substantial volume of reserves is thus
necessary for us to have manoeuvrability and flexibility in our development policy.
We should, therefore, use them wisely to increase our development potential and not
fritter them away.
11. Industrial production in the current fiscal year is expected to show an
increase of 5-6 per cent. This is no doubt less than the growth of industrial production
2

in 1976-77. However, it has to be recognised that the lower growth rate this year is to
a large extent due to the shortage of power which is directly attributable to the past
neglect of this vital sector. Besides, a substantial part of the increased output of major
industries in 1976-77, such as iron and steel and coal went into inventories rather than
in satisfying final demand. By contrast, inventories in these industries have shown a
healthy decline in the current year.
12. It goes without saying that we cannot be satisfied with the present rate of
growth of industrial production. We must strive for acceleration in industrial growth
since it can make a material contribution in generating new employment opportunities,
maintaining price stability and providing savings for future growth. An increase in
public investment, particularly in infrastructural facilities such as power, coal, transport
and irrigation can provide the necessary fillip. In addition, there is an urgent need to
improve project implementation and make an effective use of resources.
13. An improvement in the state of consumer goods industries depends upon
cost reduction through more efficient operation and modernisation and on generation
of a more broadbased demand. An increase in rural incomes resulting from the increased
emphasis on agricultural investment and rural development should prove beneficial to
a wide range of industries. This only reinforces our conviction that rural development
should constitute the heart of the future strategy of growth.
14. The role of exports should not be underestimated in this regard. Export
demand has sustained to a significant extent industries like engineering, leather, iron
and steel, textiles and sugar. Though in a continental economy like India export led
growth may be out of question, the important role which exports can play in sustaining
production and investment needs to be emphasised. The relative freedom and
manoeuvrability which growing export earnings have given to policy making underscore
the importance of a sustained export drive.
15. In spite of the considerably better economic performance during the current
year, the basic problems of unemployment and poverty continue to be with us. A year
is too short a period to make any serious impression on these gigantic problems. We
made a beginning last year by allocating more resources to agriculture and ancillary
services, irrigation and rural infrastructure. We will have to persist along these lines
because it is only over time that the necessary increase in output and employment will
come about. The effort to plan, build an implementation organisation, arrange supply
lines of inputs and marketing will have to go on unremittingly. The details of this
general strategy of development will be available to us when the new Plan is presented
to the nation next month.
16. Certain broad decisions which will be part of this strategy have already
been taken. Government have formulated a target of creating an additional irrigation
potential of 17 million hectares in the next 5 yeaRs.Nine million hectares will be
under major irrigation and 8 million hectares will be under minor irrigation so that an
3

optimal use will be made of both surface and ground-water resources. Simultaneously
efforts will be made to ensure that this potential as well as existing facilities are used
effectively. The supply of inputs will be increased through investment in industries
like electricity and fertilizeRs.Government will also promote the use of organic manures
along with chemical fertilizers to protect the quality of the soil over the long run.
Command area development programmes will be implemented vigorously.
17. In many parts of the country a large proportion of the area under
cultivation is without irrigation at present and it will be without irrigation in the
future as well because of lack of adequate surface or ground water resources. These
areas also have to prosper if rural disparities are not to widen. Therefore much more
attention will have to be paid to dry cultivation met-hods. This is extremely important
because all of our millets, and a large proportion of pulses, oilseeds and cotton are
grown under such conditions, leading to low growth of output and violent fluctuations
in output and prices.
18. Along with agriculture small industries and rural industries have an
-Important part to play in the elimination of poverty and unemployment. The new
Industrial Policy Statement embodies this goal of government policy. Large area; of
production have been reserved for cottage and small industries and an improved
organisation which will help them grow faster has been outlined. At the same time,
since many of these industries may not be viable without a great deal of technical
improvement, there is an urgent need to undertake research and render technical
assistance to them. I earnestly hope that efforts in this direction will be made by
public sector enterprises and others in the organised sector.
19. Industrial unrest has been causing a great deal of anxiety this year. A
certain reaction to the earlier constraint under the obnoxious emergency regime is
understandable. But output is likely to be affected seriously if this unrest is allowed to
continue unabated. While the legitimate demands for additional emoluments should
be met, these have to be appraised against the socio-economic realities of the country.
It is, therefore, important to have guidelines to determine a wages, incomes and prices
policy. We have appointed a study group to suggest guidelines for such a policy. Its
report is due to be submitted shortly. A loss of production is not in the interest of the
country. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that labour management and
government cooperate in bringing about harmonious industrial relations.
20. The availability of resources for development does not seem to have
kept pace with the need for investment. This is because of the rapid increase in
non-development expenditure and the erosion of the resource base. Therefore, it
is necessary to practise the utmost economy in administrative expenditure and to
curtail the various concessions and subsidies given to different sections of society
without adequate economic justification. We should aim at greater cost
effectiveness through better project planning and implementation. The working
4

of public sector projects should be improved still further so that their surpluses
contribute more to the public exchequer.
21. There is also an urgent need to increase individual and corporate saving if
increased investment expenditure is to take place without any adverse pressures on
prices. This would require greater simplicity in the life style of those individuals who
can save, and a greater efficiency and a reduction in inessential expenditure on the
part of corporations.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1977-78
22. In the Revised Estimates for 1977-78, the revenue from income and
corporation taxes shows a shortfall of Rs.36 crores and Union excise duties are
expected to yield Rs.140 crores less than the Budget Estimates of Rs.2336 crores
and Rs.4593 crores respectively. This is mainly due to the slower growth of industrial
production in certain sectoRs.The yield from customs revenues and the interest-tax,
on the other hand, is expected to show an improvement of Rs.52 crores and Ps.16
crores over the Budget Estimates of Rs.1728 crores and Rs.99 crores respectively.
After allowing for States’ share of taxes and duties, which remains at Rs.1799 crores
as in the original Budget, Centre’s share of tax revenue will be less than the Budget
estimate by Rs.100 crores.
23. Market loans will exceed the Budget figure of Rs.1000 crores by Rs.183
crores, because of larger deposit accretions with banks. But net receipts on account
of external assistance will be lower than the Budget Estimate of Rs.1052 crores by
Rs.275 crores. This is due to the fact that a larger proportion of aid received now is
project aid which is by nature slow disbursing. Programme assistance, which would
have been utilised quickly, has been reduced because of the improvement in our
balance of payments.
24. During the course of the year a number of decisions taken by Government
for the benefit of large sections of the population cast additional burdens on the Budget.
To benefit farmers, the procurement prices of paddy and wheat were increased during
the year without raising the issue prices from the public distribution system. Again,
urea prices were further reduced by Rs.100 per tonne in October last year, though in
the course of the year the cost of imported fertilizers increased significantly and the
retention prices to domestic manufacturers of fertilizers were raised to improve their
viability. This policy of pricing fertilizers involves a subsidy from the Central Budget
which is much more than the revenue from import and excise duties on fertilizers.
25. A number of benefits were given to Central Government employees. An
additional instalment of dearness allowance was sanctioned to them during the year.
The rate of interest on Government provident funds has been enhanced and the incentive
bonus scheme for those subscribers who do not make withdrawals has been further
liberalised. The pensioners too were sanctioned another instalment of relief from
September, 1977. These and other concessions given add up to a substantial expenditure.
5

26. Non-Plan revenue expenditure, excluding Defence, is likely to exceed the
Budget Estimate of Rs.5436 crores by Rs.118 crores. Of this increase, Rs.84 crores is
under export promotion due mainly to a spill over of payments pertaining to 1976-77
and the introduction in the current year of a system of quicker disbursement of assistance
to exporters. Barring this increase, non-Plan revenue expenditure has been kept
practically within the original Budget despite the additional burdens already mentioned.
This is a welcome departure from the trend in the past several years of a steep increase
in non-Plan expenditure. We have been able to achieve it by enforcing the utmost
economy and pruning inessential expenditures to the maximum extent possible.
27. The variations in non-Plan capital expenditure have been somewhat wider.
There has been a net increase of Rs.100 crores on account of technical credits to
foreign countries under bilateral rupee trade agreements. These credits will be repaid
when the imbalance in trade is corrected subsequently. The net outgo on account of
fertilizer imports will be Rs.190 crores more due partly to bunching of imports towards
the end of the year, and partly to a rise in international prices.
28. As Hon’ble Members are aware, we have restored to the workers the
minimum bonus of 8.33 per cent for the year 1976. A wage settlement was also reached
with port and dock workers involving arrear payments from January, 1974. These
have imposed an additional financial burden on public sector enterprises. This and
certain other adverse factors have led to an increase of Rs.113 crores in the budgetary
support to public sector undertakings.
29. The expenditure on Defence continues to be the same as in the original
Budget, viz. Rs.2752 crores.
30. Revised Estimates show that Plan expenditure from the Budget on
petroleum, fertilizers, steel and telecommunications is going to be substantially less
than in the Budget. This was mainly due to slippages in delivery schedules of machinery
and equipment and in civil construction. Also, a few public sector undertakings were
able to generate more internal resources than anticipated earlier and therefore needed
less budgetary support for financing their Plan outlay.
31. On the other hand, the total outlay on agriculture including rural
development is expected to increase by Rs.12 crores. Plan expenditure on health will
also be higher by Rs.13 crores, mainly on account of the intensification of the malaria
eradication programme. New schemes and accelerated work on on-going schemes,
specially those linked to steel and power plants, have led to an increase of Rs.13
crores in the outlay on the coal sector.
32. Overall, the budgetary outlay on Central Plan schemes is expected to be
Rs.230 crores less than the original Budget provision of Rs.3978 crores. I am not at all
happy about the pace at which expenditure on Plan projects takes place. What is
needed is a drastic change in organisation. It is proposed to devote much greater
attention to this question in the coming months.
6

33. Central assistance to the States’ Plans will be Rs.2031 crores as against
Rs.1617 crores provided in the Budget. An additional sum of Rs.414 crores was provided
as a cover for the gap in States’ resources for financing their Plans and as advance
Plan assistance to the States affected by the recent unprecedented natural calamities.
34. When I presented the Budget last year I had estimated a budgetary deficit
of Rs.84 crores. This was after 1 had taken credit for a borrowing of Rs.800 crores
from the Reserve Bank of India on the assumption that foreign exchange reserves
would be drawn down during the year. My anticipation of the country’s ability to draw
down the foreign exchange reserves has not materialised. Since I had made a clear
commitment that I would use this credit from the Reserve Bank only if the reserves
were drawn down, I do not propose to resort to this borrowing. The total budgetary
deficit is now expected to be of the order of Rs.975 crores. This may appear to be a
sizeable sum but let me first clarify that of this amount, the sum of Rs.414 crores is
directly accounted for by the additional assistance which I was compelled to make to
the States on account of their deficits. Members will recollect that 1 had drawn attention
to the improvident financial policies of the outgoing Governments in the States. In
addition a number of States which suffered serious damage on account of cyclones
and floods had also to be assisted. As a result there was substantial erosion of resources.
It was my duty to assist the new Governments of the States so as to enable them to
start on a reasonably clean slate. Having done so, I can reasonably expect them to
manage their affairs hereafter in such a way that they do not need to have recourse to
unauthorised overdrafts. I would like to state categorically that it will be my endeavour
to put a stop to this unhealthy practice.
35. Another large sum of Rs.190 crores is accounted for by importation of
fertilizers. We have in fact by this process converted foreign exchange into a valuable
fertilizer stock position and in this process we have not added to the money supply.
Hon’ble Members will appreciate that despite what seemingly appears to be a major
deficit, the Government’s prudent policies of supply management and credit restraint
have controlled any possible adverse effects and indeed we have ended the year with
no inflation at all.
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1978-79
36. The Annual Plan for 1978-79 has been prepared pending the finalisation
of the new National Plan. The Fifth Plan is being terminated at the end of the current
financial year and the new Plan will start from 1st April, 1978. The Planning
Commission is presently engaged in formulating the new strategy of development in
keeping with the changed priorities. It will be finalised after the National Development
Council deliberates upon it next month.
37. Hon’ble Members will appreciate that planning being a continuous process,
at any point of time there is a large number of schemes and programmes under way
which cannot be given up. Besides, many of these projects are in advanced stages of
7

completion and therefore adequate provision is necessary if these are to yield timely
results. These considerations have circumscribed our freedom in reordering Plan
priorities for 1978-79. Nevertheless, I venture to say, the Annual Plan for 1918-79, as
it has emerged, reflects the present Government’s commitment to a new
agriculture-oriented and employment-intensive strategy for development.
38. The total outlay on the Annual Plans of the Centre, States and Union
territories for 1978-79 will be Rs.11649 crores as against Rs.9960 crores in 1977-78.
This represents an increase of 17 per cent. Continuing schemes absorb as much as
Rs.10465 crores of this outlay. Out of the remainder, Rs.150 crores have been allocated
for starts on new power projects and Rs.1034 crores for schemes under other sectors.
As much as 80 per cent of the latter i.e. Rs.828 crores, is accounted for by agricultural
and other schemes subserving the development of rural areas.
39. The Central Budget for 1978-79 contains a provision of Rs.7281 crores
for the Central Plan and for assistance towards the Plans of States and Union territories.
The corresponding figure for 1977-78 was Rs.5790 crores.
40. A provision of Rs.2761 crores has been made for Central assistance for
States’ Plans and for Union territories Plans, the sub-Plans of the Hills and Tribal
areas, North Eastern Council and assistance to the Rural Electrification Corporation.
A provision of Rs.4520 crores has been made in the Budget towards the Central Plan.
Together with the internal and other resources of public sector undertakings, the Central
Plan will be Rs.5664 crores in 1978-79 as against Rs.4939 crores in 1977-78. Inclusive
of their own resources, the Plans of States and Union territories will add up to Rs.5985
crores as compared to Rs.5021 crores in 1977- 78.
41. For the first time in many years, the States’ and Union territories’ Plans
together will be larger than the Central Plan. The step up in the outlay on States’ Plans
as a whole is 19 per cent while the Plans of the Union territories will go up by 27 per
cent. The Central Plan, on the other hand, will increase by 15 per cent. This reflects
a reordering of our Plan priorities In favour of agriculture, irrigation, power and rural
development all of which figure prominently in States’ Plans and in some measure a.
shift towards greater decentralisation in planning. Full provision has been made in
each State’s Plan for meeting the requirements of agriculture, the ongoing major and
medium irrigation projects as well as power projects. Adequate provision has also
been made for essential new schemes in these two sectors.
42. In keeping with our emphasis on agriculture and rural development, the
Plan outlay for agriculture has been raised by Rs.490 crores to Rs.1754 crores for
1978-79. In particular the outlay on Command Area Development has been stepped
up from Rs.49 crores in 1977-78 to Rs.82 crores in 1978-79 and that on Small Farmers’
Development Agency in the Central Plan from Rs.45 crores to Rs.115 crores in 1978-79.
The outlay on the drought prone area programme has been raised from Rs.51 crores in
8

1977-78 to Rs.76 crores for 1978-79. The desert development programme is being
allocated Rs.20 crores for 1978- 79 as against only Rs.6 crores in 1977- 78.
43. In the new planning strategy, block development plans will be a major
instrument for achieving full employment in rural areas in a time bound programme.
The details of this programme are being worked out. In the meanwhile, I have made
a taken provision of Rs.20 crores for this programme. This provision will be enlarged
as the full details of the programme are known.
44. As part of the new strategy for rural development, it is proposed to launch
a massive programme of dairy development Operation Flood II-which will raise the
nutritional standards of the people, generate employment for about 4 million people in
the first phase and augment the Incomes in rural areas through. a viable subsidiary
occupation. The project which is estimated to cost nearly Rs.500 crores is being
processed for implementation but meanwhile action on certain essential pre-programme
elements has already been authorised so that the main work on the programme may
start in time.
45. Having regard to the extensive coastline of our country and the large
numbers of people engaged in fisheries, the outlay on fisheries in the Central Plan is
being raised from Rs.33 crores in 1977-78 to Rs.61 crores in 1978-79. This enhanced
outlay will, apart from strengthening basic infrastructuraI facilities, enable us to enlarge
employment and augment the incomes of fishermen.
46. In may last Budget speech, I had indicated that as part of a comprehensive
programme of rural infrastructure development It was necessary to accelerate the
construction of all-weather approach roads and the provision of drinking water facilities
in problem villages. In 1978-79, the outlay on rural roads in the States’ Plans has been
stepped up to Rs.115 crores as against the current year’s outlay of Rs.85 crores. The
provision for rural water supply in the States, Plans in 1978-79 will be Rs.105 crores
as against Rs.70 crores in the current year. This will be supplemented by a special
provision in the Central Plan to the extent of Rs.60 crores. The promise made last year
that the allocations for rural water supply and rural roads will be enhanced has thus
been redeemed. I will go further and extend an assurance to the States that if these
programmes are implemented effectively I shall be prepared to consider increasing
these allocations.
47. I have already emphasised the need to improve the opportunities for gainful
employment in rural areas through the development of rural and small scale industries.
The total allocation for these in 1978-79 will be Rs.219 crores against Rs.145 crores
in 1977-78.
48. The programmes for welfare of the Scheduled Castes and other backward
classes will receive a special impetus with a step up in the outlay from Rs.86 crores
in 1977-78 to Rs.125 crores in 1978-79. The outlays in the States’ Plans for tribal
9

development will be increased from PS. 258 crores, in 1977-78 to Rs.343 crores in
1978-79. In addition, the special Central assistance for tribal sub-Plans will be stepped
up from Rs.55 crores in 1977-78 to Rs.70 crores in 1978-79.
49. The creation of an additional irrigation potential of 17 million hectares
during the next five years is an ambitious programme which will call for a large
increase in investment and a restructuring, strengthening and streamlining of the
organisational set-up for planning, execution and monitoring. The outlay on major
and medium irrigation projects for 1978-79 will be Rs.1166 crores as against Rs.1032
crores in 1977-78. The Plan outlay for minor irrigation will be Rs.235 crores in 1978-79
as against Rs.206 crores in 1977-78. It will be supplemented to a large extent by loans
from the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation. It is expected that an
additional irrigation potential of 3 million hectares will be created during 1978-79 as
against 2.23 million hectares in 1977-78.
50. Inadequate allocations in the past for power and the leisurely pace of
execution of electricity projects have led to a chronic shortage of this basic Infrastructure
facility. Both these need to be corrected if recurrent power shortages are not to hold
up our progress. Therefore the Plan for 1978-79 envisages a massive addition to
generating capacity and the development of the transmission and distribution system.
Works on schemes with a total capacity of about 30000 MW would be in different
stages of execution in the coming year. Of this about 3500 MW will be commissioned
in 1978-79 as against about 2000 MW expected in the current year and the total
generating capacity in the country will then be raised to 29000 MW.
51. In the Central sector, provision is being made for fresh starts on a number
of projects such as the Korba super thermal project, the Ramagundam super thermal
project. the power station including the second mine cut at Neyveli, the Badarpur
thermal station stage Ill, the Bokaro thermal station of DVC, and the pumped storage
plant of Panchet Hill. Provision has also been made for taking up new 400 KV
transmission lines in the Central sector associated with super thermal stations and in
the States. Work on load despatch stations is also being accelerated. This should give
the House an idea of the programme of power generation which we are going to
undertake.
52. A sum of Rs.244 crores has been provided in the Central Plan for power
development. The outlays in States’ and Union territories’ Plans, which account for
bulk of the provision for power, add up to Rs.1953 crores. The provision in 1978-79
for the power sector would be Rs.2217 crores compared to Rs.1925 crores in the
current year. In view of the importance of rural electrification the provision for it has
been raised to Rs.297 crores as compared to Rs.195 crores in the current year. We
shall ensure that these projects are implemented quickly and efficiently so that the
economy derives full benefit from such a large volume of investment.
10

53. A provision of P s. 6 30 crores is being made for the oil sector in 1978-79
because there can be no slackening of our efforts towards self-sufficiency in crude oil.
This is yet another step forward in the nation’s march towards self-reliance.
54. A Budget provision of Rs.563 crores is being made for steel in 1978-79 as
against Rs.511 crores during 1977-78. The requirements of Bhilai and Bokaro expansion
programmes, the cold rolled grain oriented plant at Rourkela and the Salem steel plant
have been met. The outlay on Kudremukh project is being stepped up from B s. 142
crores in 1977- 78 to R s. 213 crores next year, in order to be able to meet the deadline
set for the completion of the project.
55. An impression has been sought to be created that this Government is
giving less emphasis to family planning. Such an impression is totally unwarranted.
Our commitment to a vigorous and nation-wide programme of family planning is firm
and clear. A provision of Rs.393 crores is being made in 1978-79 for health and family
welfare as against only Rs.284 crores in 1977-78. It is now felt that instead of
concentrating only or. the narrow aspects of family planning a broader concept of
family welfare will lead to a better acceptance of family planning practices. Funds
have also been provided on an adequate scale both in the Central and States’ Plans for
expansion of health cover for rural areas including the Scheme for community health
workers.
56. This Government fully recognises that science and technology have a
valuable contribution to make in the modernisation of our economy and, in the growth
of agriculture and industry. Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that the outlay on
science and technology has been increased from Rs.179 crores in 1977-78 to Rs.220
crores for 1978-79, i.e., an increase of 23 per cent. Similarly the provision for the
Indian Council for Agricultural Research has been increased from Rs.37 crores in
1977-78 to Rs.51 crores for 1978-79. The Indian Satellite Project (INSAT-I) for which
a provision of Rs.23 crores has been made for 1978-79 also needs special mention.
This project is unique in that it combines a package of facilities covering
Telecommunications, meteorology and television.
57. Non-Plan revenue expenditure, other than Defence, is estimated at Rs.5908
crores showing an increase of Rs.354 crores over the Revised Estimates for the current
year. Interest payments and grants to States together account for an increase of Rs.384
crores. If we exclude these two items, the other non-Plan revenue expenditure will be
less than the Revised Estimates for the current year. This has been made possible by
a rigorous scrutiny of non-Plan expenditure, pruning it with a view to achieving, the
utmost economy. The various subsidy payments have also been reviewed in the light
of their continued relevance in the present economic situation and the provisions
therefor have been suitably reduced. Non-Plan budgetary support to public sector
enterprises will also be Rs.127 crores less than in the current year.
11

58. Defence expenditure next year will be Rs.2945 crores, as against Rs.2752
crores in the current year.
59. Gross tax revenue for 1978-79, at the existing rates of taxation, is expected
to amount to Rs.9636 crores showing an increase of Rs.730 crores over the Revised
Estimates for the current year. Income tax and corporation tax receipts are expected to
go up by Rs.115 crores and Rs. 145 crores respectively. Union excise duties are
estimated to yield Rs.374 crores more. The yield from customs revenue will also be
more by Rs.70 crores. States’ share of taxes and duties, at Rs.1929 crores, will be
higher by Rs.130 crores.
60. Market loans will yield Ps.1650 crores as compared to Rs.1183 crores in
the current year. Net external assistance, after providing for repayments and interest
payments, is estimated at Rs.1138 crores, including disbursements against new credits.
61. Taking other receipts into account, total receipts in 1978-79 are estimated
at Rs.17021 crores. Total expenditure for the coming year will be Rs.18417 crores.
The overall budgetary gap at the existing rates of taxation will thus be Rs.1396 crores.
Hon’ble Members will recollect that Government announced yesterday their decision
to sanction with effect from 1st January, 1978 another instalment of dearness allowance
to Central Government employees. Government’s new policy in regard to sugar industry
was also announced yesterday. These two decisions may cast an additional burden of
the order of Rs.80 crores on the Central exchequer next year. Understandably I have
not taken this into account in my Budget proposals. It is, however, my hope that this
additional burden will be substantially accommodated within the Budget Estimates by
economy measures which are being progressively implemented.
PART B
62. The gap of Rs.1396 crores is clearly a very substantial gap and places on my
shoulders a difficult and challenging responsibility to find ways and means of bridging
the gap. I have already enumerated a number of favourable factors in the national
economy which give us the necessary strength and opportunity to manage the economy
even with a large though reasonable deficit without creating inflationary conditions.
However, prudence would require that the deficit, no matter how reasonable, should
be kept as low as possible and it is, therefore, necessary to mobilise additional resources
to the maximum extent possible. I am sure that the nation will willingly make a
substantial contribution towards the fulfilment of a national Plan of a magnitude which
will enable us to reach our objectives at a faster pace.
63. In making my proposals for resource mobilisation I have borne in mind
the salutary principles of tax policy which have been laid down in the Economic
Policy Resolution of the Janata Party issued in November, 1977. These principles bear
repetition.
12

“We believe that the taxation policy of the Government must keep in
mind five considerations:
(1) Increased public investment expenditure must necessitate increased public
income. The people of the country, therefore, have to accept the burden of higher
taxation needed for investment in the future.
(2) Taxation policy must simultaneously aim at redistributive justice and must
take into consideration the capacity to pay.
(3) Taxes should be easy to collect and it should be easy for the taxpayer to
know what he has to pay. There is urgent need for the simplification and rationalisation
of the tax administration.
(4)

Taxes must have an in-built growth potential and inherent buoyancy.

(5) Taxation policy must aim at stimulating national growth and must
encourage production and savings.”
64. I have had the advantage also of receiving advice from all sections of
society and from all parts of the country. In addition I have received two important
reports - the interim report of the Chokshi Committee on Direct Taxes and the final
report of the Jha Committee on Indirect Taxes. These reports contain a number of
valuable suggestions and I have given them respectful consideration.
65. Before I come to my taxation proposals 1 would like to make some
important policy announcements which have a bearing on the budgetary position.
66. The demonetisation of high denomination bank notes was a step primarily
aimed at controlling illegal transactions. It is a part of a series of measures which
Government has taken and is determined to take against anti-social elements. Despite
the utmost vigilance of the Customs authorities and considerable seizures and
confiscations of smuggled gold, it is an unfortunate and distressing fact that gold
smuggling has to some degree continued. The substantial difference between Indian
gold prices and international gold prices has served as a temptation to smugglers.
Gold smuggling is not only illegal but has helped to sustain black money operations
and foreign exchange racketeering. It is, therefore, necessary for us to think of economic
measures in addition to preventive measures to tackle this evil of gold smuggling. We
have given very careful thought to the question and have decided to commence the
sale of gold from the stocks held by Government. The details of the scheme are being
worked out and will be announced shortly.
67. There is an excellent market for Indian gold jewellery abroad which would
not only enable us to earn a significant amount of foreign exchange but also gainfully
employ the undoubted craftsmanship of Indian jewellers. Hitherto the export of gold
jewellery has been inhibited by the high local price of gold, restrictions placed on
13

such exports and the complex and cumbersome bonding procedures. Government have,
therefore, decided to introduce a simplified scheme for the encouragement of the
export of gold jewellery. Such exports will be facilitated either by allowing importation
of gold or by the sale of Government gold stocks at international prices. The details of
the scheme will be announced very shortly.
68. Members will recollect that the Janata Party manifesto had contained a
promise that the question of removing sales tax and octroi duties would be duly
considered by the Government. I have had a series of discussions with the Chief
Ministers and Finance Ministers of the States to achieve this desirable objective.
The total revenue from sales tax is of the order of Rs.2500 crores, and it is growing
steadily. It constitutes the main source of revenue of the States. The Chief Ministers
of the States have generally showed a lack of enthusiasm for the abolition of the
sales tax. In view of the attitude of the States and since sales tax is a State subject,
the task of persuading the States to give up sales tax calls for persistence and patience.
It certainly cannot be regarded as something which can be accomplished in the
immediate future.
69. The octroi duty, however, stands on a different footing. The revenue from
octroi duty is of the order of Rs.250 crores. There has been a long standing demand
for the removal of this obnoxious levy which causes great inconvenience to trade and
the transport industry. All committees which have gone into the subject have
unanimously proposed its abolition. Studies have also revealed that the cost of collection
of the octroi duty is unduly high. There can be no two opinions that the removal of
octroi duty will be widely welcomed since its abolition will assist the orderly and
healthy growth of the transport system in the country and will considerably reduce
freight costs. I, therefore, propose to request the State Governments to introduce suitable
legislation for the removal of octroi. The octroi revenues are at present going to the
local authorities. Quite understandably they will seek from the State Governments a
reimbursement for the loss of revenue and in turn the State Governments will no
doubt claim a measure of compensation from the Centre. We shall hold discussions
with the State Governments for finding a satisfactory solution.
70. I have now to say a few words on behalf of my colleague the Minister of
Communications. The upward revision of emoluments of employees in the past few
years has resulted in substantial increase in the expenditure of the Postal Branch of
the Posts and Telegraphs Department which is highly labour intensive. The revenues
have not, however, kept pace with the expenditure and the costs of various postal
services exceed the revenues earned. Consequently, the Postal Branch has been incurring
a deficit which is estimated at about Rs.23 crores in the current year. While there is
justification for increasing the tariffs for most of the postal services, it is proposed to
touch only those services which will not affect the common man, particularly in the
rural areas. A memorandum showing the proposed changes in the postal tariffs is
being circulated along with the Budget papers.
14

71. The tariff revisions, which will be given effect to from a date to be notified
by the Government after the Finance Bill is passed, are estimated to bring in an
additional revenue of Rs.13.73 crores per annum. The yield during 1978-79 is estimated
at Rs.11.44 crores. The results of the tariff revisions have been accounted for in
estimating the internal resources of the Posts and Telegraphs.
72.

I shall now deal with my proposals in the sphere of direct taxes.

73. 1 have kept in view the fact that a substantial increase in investment has
necessarily to be backed by increased efforts at mobilisation of savings. My proposals
in the field of direct taxes are accordingly designed to promote larger savings; to
curb extravagant and wasteful expenditure in businesses and professions; and to
channelise funds for stimulating growth and production. I have also sought to provide
some tax relief in selected areas with a view to encouraging larger investment in
desired directions.
74. In order to mobilise additional resources in the form of savings, I propose
to raise the rates of compulsory deposit in the case of income-tax payers. While
taxpayers having current income up to Rs.15,000 will continue to enjoy immunity
from the requirement of making compulsory deposit, in the case of incomes exceeding
Rs.15, 000 and up to Rs.25, 000 the rate will be raised from 4 per cent to 41 per cent.
On the slab of Rs.25, 001 to Rs.70, 000, compulsory deposit is currently made at the
rate of 10 per cent. I propose to split this slab into two. While the rate on the slab of
Rs.25, 001 to Rs.35, 000 will be 11 per cent, the rate on the slab of Rs.35, 001 to
Rs.70, 000 will be 121/2 per cent. On the slab over Rs.70, 000 the rate will be raised
from 12 per cent to 15 per cent. Approximately Rs.25 crores will accrue in 1978-79 as
a result of this measure.
75. I propose to liberalise the concession in respect of long-term savings
through life insurance, provident fund contributions and other approved forms of saving.
At present, 100 per cent of the first Rs.4, 000 of the qualifying savings, 50 per cent of
the next Rs.6,000 and 40 per cent of the balance is allowed as deduction in computing
the taxable income. I propose to allow a deduction equal to 100 per cent of the first
Rs.5,000 of the qualifying savings. The quantum of deduction in respect of the next
Rs.5,000 will continue at the existing rate of 50 per cent and, in respect of the
balance, at the existing rate of 40 per cent. The monetary limit for the savings qualifying
for deduction under this provision is also being raised from Rs.20,000 to Rs.30,000.
These measures will result in a revenue loss of Rs.10 crores in a full year and Rs.7.5
crores in 1978-79.
76. Investors understandably prefer investment which brings them a safe return,
which is provided by fixed deposits in banks or shares of established companies with
a good record for payment of dividends. This results in new companies not attracting
adequate support. In order to stimulate such investment, I propose to give a deduction
in the computation of taxable income of 50 per cent of the amount invested in equity
15

shares of new industrial companies. The maximum investment in a year qualifying for
this deduction will be limited to Rs.10,000. This will entail a loss of Rs.5 crores in a
full year and Rs.3.5 crores in 1978-79. I would cheerfully accept a much larger loss if
it results in stimulating larger investments.
77. Last year, I had introduced a provision to exempt capital gains in cases
where the sale proceeds arising from the transfer of an asset are reinvested within six
months in units of the Unit Trust of India, shares of Indian companies, bank deposits
and other specified assets. In order that this concession leads to the flow of investible
funds into fresh ventures, I propose to provide with immediate effect that investment
in shares of. Indian companies will be taken into account for the purposes of exemption
from capital gains tax only where the investment is made in equity shares of new
industrial companies.
78. Banks allow substantial advances against the security of fixed deposits
with them. Hence, taxpayers who get exemption from capital gains tax by making
such deposits obtain an unduly large tax benefit without commensurate sacrifice. I
have, therefore, decided that fixed deposits with banks made after today will not
qualify as an eligible mode of investment for the purposes of this exemption.
79. The annual letting value of a newly constructed house is reduced for tax
purposes by an amount up to Rs.1,200 in respect of each residential unit for a period
of five years. With a view to providing a stimulus for construction of houses, particularly
for persons in the low and middle income brackets, 1 propose to raise the monetary
limit of Rs.1,200 to Rs.2,400.
80. Initial depreciation allowance is currently granted at the rate of 20 per
cent on the cost of new buildings erected by employers for their low paid
employees. In order to give a greater impetus to the construction of buildings for
workeRs.I propose to Increase the rate of initial depreciation allowance from 20
per cent to 40 per cent.
81. The foreign remuneration of Indian citizens employed outside India is
liable to Indian income-tax if their stay in India exceeds a specified period. As this
results in avoidable hardship and discourages such persons from spending even a
reasonable period on vacation in their home country, I propose to provide that Indian
citizens employed outside India may stay on vacation in the country for 89 days in a
year without attracting such tax liability.
82. In order to ensure that winnings from horse races are effectively brought
within the tax net, I propose to provide for deduction of tax at source at the rate of
34.5 per cent from winnings in excess of Rs,2,500. This measure would yield Rs.4
crores in a full year and Rs.3.5 crores in 1978-79.
83. Extravagant and socially wasteful expenditure is often incurred on
advertisement, publicity and sales promotion. In order to put a curb on such expenditure
16

at the cost of the exchequer, I propose to provide for the disallowance of a part of such
expenditure in the computation of taxable profits. Where the aggregate expenditure on
advertisement, publicity and sales promotion in India does not exceed 114 per cent of
the turnover or gross receipts of the business or profession, 10 per cent of such
expenditure will be disallowed in computing the taxable profits. Where such aggregate
expenditure exceeds 114 per cent but does not exceed 112 per cent of the turnover or
gross receipts, the disallowance will be made at the rate of 121 per cent; and where
such expenditure exceeds 112 per cent of the turnover or gross receipts, the disallowance
will be made at the rate of 15 per cent. These provisions will not apply in cases where
the aggregate expenditure on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion does not
exceed Rs.20, 000 in a year. Newly established industrial concerns will also be exempted
from this provision for an initial period of three years. This measure will yield Rs.31
crores in a full year and about Rs.25 crores in 1978-79.
84. A weighted deduction is currently allowed in the computation of taxable
profits with reference to expenditure incurred by Indian companies and resident
taxpayers, other than companies, on development of export market. The weighted
deduction is allowed at the rate of 150 per cent of the acutal expenditure in the case
of widely-held companies and at the rate of 133.3 per cent in the case of other taxpayers.
While the full deduction of expenditure incurred for development of export markets is
entirely justifiable, and no part of such expenditure will be disallowed under the
proposed provision for disallowance of expenditure on advertisement, publicity and
sales promotion, I do not see adequate justification now for continuing to subsidise
such expenditure by the grant of weighted deduction. I, therefore, propose to discontinue
the grant of weighted deduction in relation to such expenditure incurred after 31st
March, 1978. This measure is likely to yield Rs.10 crores in a full year and Rs.8
crores in 1978-79.
85. In the case of a taxpayer who has previously been assessed to income-tax,
advance tax becomes payable only if a notice in this behalf is issued by the Income-tax
Officer. Hence, if an advance tax notice is not issued in the case of such a taxpayer,
he will have no liability to pay any advance tax. On the other hand, taxpayers who
have not been assessed to income-tax, are required to pay advance tax on their own on
the basis of their estimated current income. To my mind, the existing legal position is
clearly unsatisfactory. I, therefore, propose to provide that advance tax shall be
voluntarily paid by every person if his current income exceeds the specified limit.
86. The Direct Tax Laws Committee under the chairmanship of Shri C.C.
Chokshi submitted its interim report last December. The report contains a number of
valuable suggestions for simplification and rationalisation of tax laws, streamlining
assessment procedures, reducing the area of litigation and accelerating the disposal of
appeals and references In its report on the Central Direct Taxes Administration, the
Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended that amendments to the tax
laws should not be rushed through the annual Finance Bill, which needs to be passed
17

before a prescribed date, but made through separate bins whose provisions can be
considered in detail. Pursuant to this recommendation, I propose to introduce separate
legislation as early as possible to give effect to the main recommendations of the
Chokshi Committee which are acceptable to the Government. In the meanwhile, a few
changes recommended by the committee, such as deduction of tax at source from race
winnings and voluntary payment of advance tax, which could be easily incorporated
in the tax law, have been introduced through the Finance Bill.
87. The exemption limit for estate duty, which is Rs.50,000 was fixed as long
ago as 1958. As this exemption limit is unduly low, I propose to raise it to Rs.1 lakh.
Since, in this matter, we can move only with the concurrence of the State Legislatures,
a Bill for implementing this proposal, and certain other proposals in relation to estate
duty, will be introduced later this year.
88. The total additional revenue from the various measures enumerated by
me will yield Rs.30 crores in a full year and Rs.25.5 crores during 1978-79. Besides,
additional resources of about Rs.25 crores will accrue in the form of compulsory
deposits in the financial year 1978-79.
89. May I now turn to my proposals relating to indirect taxes? Our basic
national problem, and indeed this is a problem facing all developing countries, is that
the base for direct taxes is extremely narrow and the vast funds required for national
development cannot, therefore, be raised, at our present stage of development, from
direct taxes alone. While framing the proposals relating to indirect taxes, however, I
have kept in mind the need to protect small scale industry and to minimise the hardship
to the poor and the middle class consumers.
90. Honourable Members are aware that Government had appointed a
committee, to review the existing structure of the indirect tax system, under the
chairmanship of Shri L.K.Jha. The committee has now submitted its final report.
Amongst the important recommendations made by the committee are restructuring of
the pattern of central excise and customs duties, measures to assist the small scale
sector, the general reorientation of the tariff to make it income-elastic and the desirability
of introducing a value added tax so as to avoid the cascading effect of taxes on raw
materials and components of finished products. The committee has also made some
recommendations regarding indirect taxes levied by State Governments and local
authorities. Government has been examining an these recommendations with the care
which they deserve. In my last Budget, I had in fact accepted and implemented a few
of the recommendations which were available to us in the interim report of the
committee.. The proposals which I am making today incorporate some of the
recommendations made in the final report. Other recommendations which involve a
major restructuring of the system would require further study.
91. In the Plan outlay the topmost priority has been accorded to power. The
Plan provision for power generation and distribution is of the order of Rs.2, 200
18

crores in 1978- 79. 1 feel that with our enormous investments in power, there is ample
justification for claiming a contribution from those who benefit from these investments.
I am, therefore, proposing to levy a duty of 2 paise per kilowatt-hour on electricity
generated. Electricity generated for captive consumption, as well as that used in the
auxiliary plants in the generating stations for the generation of electricity, is being
exempted. I also propose to give a rebate of the duty to the producer in respect of
electricity used for agricultural purposes so that agriculturists are not affected. This
levy is expected to yield a revenue of Rs.145 crores.
92. After the nationalisation of the coal mines, coal production has increased
from about 72 million tonnes in 1971-72 to about 100 million tonnes in 1976-77. This
is the result of enormous investments made by the State after nationalisation investments which we will continue to make. Here again, the beneficiaries could, I
think, justifiably be called upon to bear a small levy of central excise duty on coal. I
propose to fix-this at rates varying from Rs.5 to Rs.10 per tonne. The lowest rate of
Rs.5 would cover three-fourth of the coal produced in the country. This measure is
expected to yield a revenue of Rs.58 crores.
93. Under Item 68 of the Central excise tariff, the rate of duty leviable on “all
articles, not elsewhere specified” is at present 2 per cent ad valorem, I propose to raise
this to the level of 5 per cent. ad valorem. While doing so, I propose to exempt some
sensitive categories of goods, namely, pesticides, weedicides, insecticides and fungicides
drugs and medicines other than proprietary or patent drugs and medicines,
pharmaceuticals and drug intermediates, from the whole of the duty leviable under
this item. Newspapers and periodicals are also being exempted completely. The existing
exemption in respect of small manufacturers whose clearance of excisable goods does
not exceed Rs.30 lakhs in the preceding year will continue. These proposals will yield
a revenue of Rs.100 crores.
94. In view of the paramount need for mobilising resources for development
without creating fresh distortions in the tax structure I propose to levy a special duty
at the rate of 1120th of the basic excise duties presently collected on each item in the
Central Excise tariff. In doing so, I propose to exempt coal, electricity and goods
which are assesseed under Item 68 of the tariff. This measure will result in an additional
revenue of Rs.214 crores on indigenous production and a sum of Rs.15 crores by way
of increase in countervailing duties on imports.
95. May I now turn to the relief which I propose to give. First of all, consistent
with the policy of the Government to encourage the small manufacturer and to widen
the entrepreneurial base in the country, I propose to provide sufficient relief to small
manufacturers so as to enable them to compete successfully with larger units. The
duty exemptions at present available to small scale manufacturers are not based on
any one pattern. Over the course of years, a number of ad hoc concessions have been
given and the principles of relief have varied very widely. In defining the small units,
19

a variety of formulae have been adopted, such as, value of clearances per annum,
quantity of clearances per annum, value of capital investment on plant and machinery,
number of workers, use of power, and a combination of two or more of these criteria.
Keeping in view the need for rationalising the pattern of relief to small industries and
bearing in mind the recommendations made by the Jha Committee, I propose to exempt
all small scale units manufacturing specified goods, whose clearances in the preceding
year did not exceed Rs.15 lakhs, from the duty payable on the first clearance of Rs.5
lakhs. The exemption will cover 69 items including, amongst others, medicines, soap
and detergents, paints and varnishes, household electrical goods, steel furniture metal
containers, aerated waters, vegetable non-essential oils, ceramics and other items
notified. This measure will benefit about 24,000 units currently under excise control.
It will reduce considerably the procedural requirements which these units are required
to follow. It will also remove the anomaly, under which relief is presently lost totally
in many cases, the moment the threshold limits of exemption are crossed. This relief
will be effective from the beginning of the next financial year and involve a revenue
sacrifice of Rs.28 crores.
96. I propose to exempt power-driven pumps mainly used in agriculture from
the whole of the excise duty leviable thereon. The measure will involve a loss of
Rs.1.5 crores per annum.
97. I also propose to extend the concession currently available to
motor-vehicles used as taxis to 3-wheeler auto-rickshaws as well, by reducing the rate
of duty leviable on the latter by 21 per cent ad valorem. Whole milk powder is being
exempted from payment of the duty leviable thereon. in an effort to make available
this commodity at a cheaper rate. I also propose to reduce the rate of duty leviable on
small refrigerators of a capacity of 100 litres and less from 40 per cent ad valorem to
30 per cent ad valorem. At present, parts of refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery
required for installation in specified establishments are assessed at a concessional rate
of 20 per cent. This concession is being extended to ready assembled airconditioning
units of the window and package type, generally used by smaller industrial installations.
Last year I had raised the excise duty on films substantially. There have been a number
of representations against the increase and the manner in which it affects the industry.
I have carefully considered the matter and propose to reduce the excise duty leviable
from Rs.7, 500 to Rs.5,000 on the third dozen slab of colour prints, of length 4,000
metres or less. Suitable adjustments are being made in the case of black and white
films as well as longer films. Duty on prints cleared for home consumption after
twelve months from the date of first release of the film for public exhibition is also
being reduced suitably. These proposals together imply a relief of about Rs.3 crores.
98. In pursuance of Government’s decisions on the Oil Prices Committee’s
Report, the tariff structure relating to lubricating oils and greases has also been
rationalised. This measure of rationalisation will yield Rs.6 3 lakhs net in a year.
20

99. I have also carried out some modifications in respect of coated fabrics,
cigars and cheroots, tea waste, vegetable products for industrial purposes and
non-cellulosic wastes, the details of which are given in the Budget documents. These
proposals will yield a revenue of Rs.6 crores.
100. I have taken note of the significant suggestions in regard to customs duties
made by the Jha Committee. As a measure of relief and particularly with a view to
bringing down capital costs, I propose to reduce the customs duties m specified items
of capital equipment not produced indigenously from the current level of ’40 per cent
to 25 per cent. The revenue loss will be of the order of Rs.9 crores.
101. I also propose to reduce the duty leviable on condenser tissue paper and
polypropylene film used in the manufacture of capacitors, by 111 per cent and 155 per
cent respectively. Use of capacitors will reduce transmission losses and will thus help
the more efficient transmission of power. Duty m electrical insulation paper is also
being reduced. These proposals will involve a revenue sacrifice of about Rs.4 crores.
102. Certain reliefs are also being given in respect of specified items of
cinematograph machinery, electronic components and Imported feature films. These
together will involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.58 lakhs.
103. I have only one proposal for upward modification of the customs tariff,
not so much as a measure of raising revenue but as a measure of protection to Indian
industry. I propose to increase the import duty on polyester filament yarn from 120
per cent to 200 per cent ad valorem. This will yield about Rs.6.4 crores in a year.
104. My proposals for customs and Central excise duties put together will
yield an additional revenue of Rs.499 crores for 1978-79.
105. The fiscal strategy underlying my proposals seeks to take advantage of
the favourable food and foreign exchange situation for generating fresh expansionary
impulses in our economy. The big step up in public investment is one element of this
strategy. Monetary policy must also be used to reinforce fiscal policy.
106. The House will recollect that Government had imposed a tax in 1974 on
interest income of banks. Honourable Members will agree with me that, now that
prices are reasonably stable and there is urgent need to stimulate productive investment,
-this tax has lost its economic justification. I propose, therefore, to withdraw the
interest-tax with immediate effect. As a sequel to this fiscal concession with a monetary
intent, the Reserve Bank of India will be announcing later in the day the realignment
of the interest rate structure.
107. The Budget Estimates for 1978- 79 have taken credit for an amount of
Rs.130 crores on account of interest-tax. Since the interest-tax for the months of
January and February, 1978 will be payable in the coming year, the actual loss of
revenue will be of the order of Rs.108 crores.
21

108. To sum up, my efforts at mobilisation of additional resources will yield in
1978-79 Rs.549.5 crores, of which Rs.499 crores will be from Union Excise and
customs duties, Rs.25.5 crores from direct taxes and Rs.25 crores as compulsory
deposits. Out of this, the States’ share will be Rs.95.5 crores and the Centre’s share
Rs.454 crores. With the withdrawal of interest-tax, the net additional resources accruing
to the Centre will be Rs.346 crores.
109. Despite the effort which I have made at raising additional resources, I am
leaving an uncovered budgetary gap of Rs.1, 050 crores. This figure will be reduced
by the receipts from sales of Government gold. For reasons which Honourable Members
will appreciate I shall not attempt to estimate this figure. But I should share with
Honourable Members the view 1 hold that, apart from preventing any resurgence of
gold smuggling, it is also justifiable, in our present circumstances, to utilise a part of
our accumulated gold to reduce the expansionary effect of budgetary transactions. It
is m the same reasoning that we have been anxious to deploy a part of our foreign
exchange reserves to offset the expansionary impact of larger Plan and investment
outlays; and 1 am confident that in the coming year the steps initiated to liberalise
imports and the major investment programme that we now propose to undertake, will
lead to a significant draw down of foreign exchange reserves. These two factors
combined with continued vigilance regarding credit should limit the net increase in
money supply to safe levels.
110. I am satisfied that the resultant monetary expansion will not lead to any
inflationary pressure particularly in view of the large stock of foodgrains and the
much greater ability that we have at present to import essential consumer goods. The
experience we have gained and the instruments we have forged in supply management
through procurement and public distribution and demand management through credit
and monetary policy should also enable us to contain such pressures.
111. In conclusion let me summarise what I seek to achieve through this Budget.
My goal is to set in motion a process of sustained increase in output and employment,
particularly in the rural areas. The programme of government expenditure on investment
is the main instrument I wish to use to attain this goal. Investment expenditure in
infrastructure facilities is being raised steeply so that bottlenecks coming in the way
of further growth are removed and there is an improvement in the general economic
climate. This has made it necessary for me to undertake sizable additional resource
mobilisation. At the same time 1 have not hesitated to offer incentives and tax
concessions where these are called for to promote investment in agriculture and industry.
112. The economic situation of the country is exceptionally favourable at present
for a bold step forward. This Budget is such a step.
(February 28, 1978)

22

