SPEECH OF SHRI T.T. KRISHNAMACHARI MINISTER OF FINANCE,
ON ECONOMIC SITUATION AND TAXATION PROPOSALS

Sir,
Honourable Members will recall that in the past I have presented a mid-year
review of the economic situation to Parliament. The annual budget provides an
opportunity for a periodical review of our plans and policies. Nevertheless, there are
occasions when even a year’s interval becomes too long for initiating remedial action
to deal with emerging circumstances. The need for a mid-year review is all the greater
during the current year because of the need to pave the way for the launching of the
Fourth Five Year Plan. It is for this reason that I have taken this opportunity to present
some supplementary proposals framed in the light of the current economic situation
and the requirements of the Fourth Five Year Plan.
It is somewhat early at this stage to attempt a full picture of the likely budgetary
outcome for the current year. However, there are sufficient indications that
supplementary measures for raising revenue are necessary to keep to our resolve of
avoiding deficit financing during the current year. Since the presentation of the Budget,
the Centre has had to grant additional dearness allowances which would result in an
expenditure of about Rs.25 crores during the year. Despite repeated appeals to the
States to avoid recourse to overdrafts from the Reserve Bank and to consolidate their
financial position, some additional assistance to a number of States has become
inevitable; and this may account for an additional outlay of about Rs.40 crores.
Honourable Members would also appreciate that in view of renewed hostilities at a
number of points on our borders we have had to provide larger amounts for police and
border security.
There are indications also that receipts on capital account would be lower under
a number of heads. In view of the sluggish conditions in the money market, we had
to reduce the borrowings programme of the Centre by about Rs.20 crores; i.e., from
Rs.270 crores assumed in the Budget to Rs.250 crores. Trends in small savings during
the past three or four months have not altogether been satisfactory; and although I
expect some improvement in the coming months, it is likely that there may be a
shortfall of about Rs.10 crores from the Budget estimate of Rs.135 crores. We have
also to reckon with a shortfall of about Rs.15 crores under annuity deposits.
On revenue account, receipts under Customs may well be somewhat larger than
we had budgeted for. A similar improvement under Excise Duties, however, does not
seem likely. Receipts under income and Corporation Tax have not been buoyant so
1

far. It would be our endeavour to step up tax collections during the rest of the year by
even more vigorous efforts. But, on the whole, it would not be safe to count on
substantial additional revenue collections for offsetting the effects of additional
expenditure on a number of items and the reduction in capital receipts to which I
referred earlier.
As for economies and shortfalls in plan and non-plan expenditure, Honourable
Members would recall that it has been my endeavour to avoid any deliberate
over-budgeting of expenditures in general. It is also of the utmost Importance that
there should be no slowing down in the implementation of continuing schemes-and
there are several such schemes in the State sector-as it would only postpone the
fruits of investments in progress. With every possible effort to secure genuine
economies in expenditure, it would still be necessary to mobilize additional resources
on a substantial scale.
When I reviewed the economic conditions in the country at the time of
presentation of the Budget, there was a fair promise of our being able to hold the price
line during the current year. Rice prices had declined by more than 10 per cent between
October 1984 and January 1965-i.e., in the immediate post-harvest period. Wheat
prices also declined between January and May. The index of wholesale prices came
down from 161 at the beginning of January to 150 by the middle of March. This was
an experience which was in sharp contrast to the trends in 1964 when the post-harvest
decline in prices was negligible. Unfortunately, prices have started rising once again
from the beginning of the current fiscal year. The index of wholesale prices reached
a new peak of 164.8 on 24th July 1965. Apart from this overall position, there are
several pockets in the country in which prices of particular foograins have soared very
high. Some increase in prices during the summer months is perhaps a normal seasonal
phenomenon. But the fact that the seasonal rise this year has not been particularly
subdued despite the increase in agricultural production last year certainly warrants no
complacency regarding the budgetary and monetary situation.
The Reserve Bank took a number of measures to increase the cost of credit, as
the House is aware, in February last in order to check excessive creation of credit.
Despite these measures, credit expansion in the last busy season was as much as
Rs.407 crores as against Rs.376 crores in the 1963-64 busy season which was itself
judged excessive. So far, the contraction in credit during the current slack season has
been Rs.87 crores or only about one-fifth of the credit expansion which took place in
the last busy season, as against a contraction of Rs.111 crores in the comparable
period of last year, which represented between one-fourth and one-third of the credit
expansion in the 1963-64 busy season. Honourable Members would appreciate that
unless credit contraction in the slack season is adequate, it will not be possible for the
banks to meet the genuine needs for credit expansion during the next busy season
without excessive resort to the Reserve Bank. It is under these circumstances that It
2

has become necessary to supplement general measures of credit restraint by selective
and direct measures; and the Reserve Bank has recently announced certain measures
in respect of groundnut, wheat, cotton and vegetable oils as well as the advance deposit
scheme against imports and the regulation on clean advances. I will have more to say
about the deposit scheme against imports a little latter. But I would like to take this
opportunity to remove some of the misconceptions regarding the ceiling on clean
advances. The Reserve Bank, for example, has not put a ceiling on the clean advances
to each particular party. It has merely sought to limit the total clean advances of each
bank, it being the responsibility of the banks concerned to adjust the advances to
individual clients in the light of their individual needs and circumstances. It should
not be difficult for the banks to discharge this responsibility in the slack season when
there should be a decline in many individual advances. It is in this light that the
impact of the measure should be judged. As the Reserve Bank has made it clear, the
position will be reviewed at the beginning of the next busy season. And the review
will naturally take into account developments during the current slack season and the
requirements of the next busy season.
In a growing and complex economy like ours, credit policy has to serve a number
of aims; while attempting to exercise a general restraint on credit in keeping with the
requirements of stability, it must bear particularly on specific points so as to discourage
speculation without retarding production. Such a discriminatory approach is by no
means easy. But the operation of a sound monetary and credit policy presupposes in
any event that the efforts of the monetary authorities will not be neutralised by excessive
credit creation on behalf of the Government.
Before leaving the subject of credit control, I would like to refer to the question
of unaccounted money. The proposals regarding voluntary disclosure that I announced
last February have led to disclosures of about Rs.50 crores of which Rs.30 crores are
in the form of tax receipts. At the same time, the continued drive against bogus hundis
and unaccounted money and its consequence of driving unaccounted money
underground have necessarily their effect on the stringency of the money market. A
considerable part of transactions which were earlier carried on outside the banking
system have now to be financed by the banking system. In judging the recent increases
in bank credit, this factor has to be borne in mind. But Honourable Members would,
I am sure, agree that there cannot be any relaxation in the attempt to bring unaccounted
money into the open; and some of the proposals I make later in regard to direct
taxation have been intended to strengthen this attempt which has a far-reaching social
and economic significance.
I had occasion, in the broadcast talk on 17th July, to refer to the continuing
difficulties in regard to foreign exchange. Our reserves have reached a low level now
of less than Rs.100 crores which is hardly sufficient for meeting the seasonal swings
in our trade and payments let alone for providing a cushion against unforeseen
3

contingencies. Essentially, our foreign exchange difficulties have arisen from the fact
that whereas import commitments have grown on a number of counts, the buoyancy in
our exports which was witnessed during the first three years of the current plan has
not been maintained since then. Exports during 1964-65, according to balance of
payments statistics, amounted to Rs.803 crores i.e., roughly the same level as in 1963-64.
Export shipments during April-June 1965 amounted to Rs.185 crores showing a decline
as compared to Rs.196 crores in April-June 1964.
I need not dwell at length on the various measures which Government have
already taken to bring about a better balance in our foreign payments position. These
include import, cuts, staggering of import payments, continuance of the export incentive
schemes with modifications and the announcement of the tax credit scheme in respect
of a number of export items. The pressure on our reserves has somewhat lessened
during the past three or four weeks. On August 13, for example, our total foreign
exchange reserves excluding gold stood at Rs.99 crores, i.e. at a somewhat higher
level than on July 16, when they stood at Rs.96 crores. Ordinarily, there should be
seasonal improvement in export receipts after October; and if we succeed in our efforts
to push out all the exports that are possible, there is every likelihood of our ending the
current fiscal year without any further loss of reserves. There is, however, no room for
complacency in regard to our foreign exchange situation. As I have already mentioned,
our reserves are already at an uncomfortably low level. The remedial measures that
we have taken have been essentially of, a restrictive nature, and it is clear that the
continuance of the present very stringent restrictions on imports for long will have
adverse effects on the growth of the economy. It should be our endeavour, therefore,
to liberalise imports to the maximum possible extent; and we propose to seek the
cooperation of friendly foreign countries and international institutions in support of
this endeavour. In the long run, however, we have to secure a steady and sizeable
increase in our export earnings in order to sustain a resonably liberal Import policy as
well as to meet the growing burden of debt charges. But a sustained dynamism in
exports can be achieved only within an environment of internal price stability.
In short, the current price situation, our balance of payments difficulties,
conditions in the money market and emergent trends in respect of the budgetary
operations of the Government, all require a substantial additional effort at resource
mobilisation during the current year. At the same time, the measures that we take now
have to be consistent with the long range interests of the economy. They have in
particular to form a part of the general framework of policies for securing progressively
higher levels of investment and productivity in the economy with emphasis on export
promotion and on encouragement to people to shift from external sources of supply to
the development of indigenous substitutes.
The draft outline of the Fourth Five Year Plan is being finalised and would
be submitted for approval to the National Development Council, Full details of the
Plan therefore would perhaps be available to the House only during the next session.
4

In the meanwhile the Planning Commission has recommended tentatively that the
Fourth Five Year Plan should involve an outlay of Rs.21,500 crores of which Rs.19,000
crores would be investment and Rs.2,500 crores current outlay. Outlay for the Public
sector is planned at Rs.14,500 crores and that for the private sector Rs.7,000 crores.
The Prime Minister at the same time has emphasised that the actual implementation of
the Plan from year to year must proceed in keeping with the over-riding consideration
that inflationary financing should be avoided altogether. It is also clear that additional
mobilisation of internal resources of the order of Rs.3,000 crores and something more
win be required during the next Plan period if the tempo of development in the economy
is to be maintained at a reasonably satisfactory level.
In the ultimate analysis our objective is not so much to increase the pace of
investment for its own sake as to bring about an improvement in the growth rate of the
economy for assuring better standards of living to our people and, for making a
satisfactory advance towards the objective of self-sustaining growth. From this point
of view, the content of the Plan and the efforts that we make to increase the productivity
of capital are even more important than the size of the Plan. It is again from this point
of view that it is of considerable importance at this stage to give high priority to
agriculture and to redouble our efforts to promote family planning so that the
achievements of our Plans are not circumscribed by a rapid growth in population. As
for industrial development, the priority in the coming years must necessarily be given
to activities associated with agriculture as well as to the production of materials and
equipment which make it possible to secure greater utilisation of existing capacity and
Improvement in balance of payments.
A great deal of detailed work has already been done in regard to the content of
the Fourth Five Year Plan and tentative targets for a number ofimportant areas such as
agriculture, power, fertilizers, cement, steel, sugar and other basic industries have
been set. The studies undertaken so far make It abundantly clear that it is both possible
and imperative to rely to the maximum possible extent on the internal production of
machinery and materials for securing the growth of the economy in a number of vital
fields. Indian industry has taken rapid strides during the first three Plan periods and it
is now at a stage where, given necessary encouragement and concentration of effort in
suitable directions. It can make a sizeable contribution both to exports and to import
substitution. The additional efforts at resource mobilisation that we might adopt
therefore at this stage have to serve a number of objectives. Apart from contributing
to the objective of raising resources for growth without inflation, these measures must
be consistent with the broad objectives and priorities of the Plan. They must, in other
words, take into account the emphasis we wish to place on agriculture and on higher
productivity all round. They must also subserve the paramount objective of giving the
maximum possible encouragement to the domestic production of machinery and
materials. The measures that I propose to announce today have been designed in
keeping with all these considerations.
5

Before I deal with the measures which I wish to submit to the House, I would
like to emphasise that the Centre alone cannot bear the full responsibility for restoring
and maintaining internal financial stability. In our Federal system, the State
Governments also have to take their appropriate share of the responsibility of raising
resources and of exercising the utmost economy in expenditure so as to achieve a
balance in their budgets.
I come now to my supplementary budget proposals. My proposals relate primarily
to changes in Import duties. Our Import Tariff has been amended piecemeal over
several decades and is no longer in tune with the requirements of our planned
development. Not only is the structure of rates inconsistent with the needs of impart
substitution, but there is a Very large number of administrative exemptions and
modifications of rates which were granted from time to time to meet particular situations
and which now result in numerous anomalies. The entire Import Tariff is proposed to
be recast to secure both higher revenue and rationalisation, bearing in mind the
considerable development that has taken place in our industrial structure over three
Plans and the imperative need to accelerate the pace of this development.
The broad structure of the proposed tariff is as follows:
The general statutory rate for machinery will be 40 per cent, but the effective
rate of import duty will be 35 per cent for the time being. Certain items of agricultural
machinery and Implements will, however, be charged at 15 per cent. Basic industrial
raw materials, such as prime steel, and non-ferrous metals will be charged to Import
duty at the rate of 40 per cent. Most processed industrial materials will be liable to
import duty at the rate of 60 per cent, Consumer goods will, by and large, be charged
at the rate of 100 per cent though higher rates charged at present on certain high profit
items such as betel nuts and liquor will continue. Protective rates will continue but
their levels have been suitably raised where appropriate in line with the structure that
I have described. GATT bindings continue to be honoured, but it is our intention to
approach the countries concerned for releases in suitable cases in order to complete
the rationalisation of the tariff.
There have often been complaints that the Import of equipment by projects is
impeded as a result of meticulous assessment at the appropriate rates of each
constituent item required for setting up the project. I now propose to introduce a
new tariff Item to cover the import of equipment needed for the initial setting up of
new projects or for undertaking substantial expansions of existing projects, in the
fields of industry, power, mining and prospecting for minerals or oil. Not only
complete equipment but also component parts and raw materials imported specifically
for fabricating equipment within India for a project, and some quantity of initial
stock of spare parts and other stores needed for the maintenance of the project can
be imported under this item. The contract or contracts would have to be registered
in advance with the Customs authorities and a provisional assessment will be made
6

immediately, obviating to the maximum possible extent the need for detailed
assessment of individual lots, after the goods arrive. The equipment imported under
the item will be charged to duty at the general machinery rate and I am confident
that the administrative improvement will facilitate the smooth import of such
equipment and also give some encouragement to the manufacture within India as
much as possible of the equipment needed for these projects.
The present tariff contains a large number of administrative reductions of rates
and exemptions, often historical survivals. Wherever possible these are being
withdrawn, except when there is still special justification, as for example, in the case
of raw materials needed to manufacture finished products for which rates of duty are
bound under the GATT. If we are to promote import substitution on a wide scale, the
imports of the finished products must bear the revised rates of duty, even if intended
for a high priority purpose.
The considerable simplification of the structure of rates should result in a saving
of time on assessment and reduction of the number of disputed cases. I am sure that
this simplification will be of help to industry in planning production.
Among the exceptions which I have retained to the general structure of rates
that I have indicated earlier I should like to mention a few. Books, fertilizers and
contraceptives will continue to be imported free of duty. Sulphur, which was paying a
duty of 10 per cent would be free hereafter. There will be no change in the rates of
duty on certain essential drugs, baby food, milk powder and newsprint.
With these revisions of the basic rates the surcharge of 10 per cent on the
amount of duty payable is being withdrawn. This also is a move towards simplification.
The regulatory duty of ten per cent is, however, being retained. In view of the extensive
changes in import duties, it is no longer necessary to continue the advance deposit
scheme against imports which was introduced as a temporary measure to stagger
imports. The Reserve Bank is, therefore, making an announcement in this regard.
The additional revenue in a full year from the revision of the Import Tariff is
expected to amount to Rs.119 crores, after allowing for a fall in revenue as a result of
the abolition of the surcharge and making provision for additional refunds and
drawbacks.
I propose in addition to raise certain Excise Duties. In the field of petroleum
products, the duty an high speed diesel oil is proposed to be raised by Rs.60 per
kilolitre from the existing level of Rs.429 and on motor spirit by about Rs.50 per
kilolitre from the present level of Rs.451. The duty on inferior kerosene will remain
unchanged, but that on superior kerosene will go up by about Rs.52 per kilolitre. The
House will appreciate that It is not practicable to raise the duty on high speed diesel
oil without a corresponding adjustment in the duty on superior kerosene 1f diversion
of kerosene to use in transport is to be avoided. In view of the plentiful supply of coal
7

the duty on furnace oil is being raised by about Rs.40 per metric tonne. On the other
hand, the duty on light diesel oil is being reduced by about Rs.125 per tonne in order
to stimulate the use of diesel engines for lift Irrigation and agricultural operations.
Altogether, the additional excise and countervailing import duty revenue from the
higher duties on petroleum products will amount to Rs.30.84 crores in a full year.
I propose also to raise by Rs.10 to Rs.50 per tonne the existing duties on steel
and pig iron and their products. The additional revenue from these excise and
countervailing import duties will amount to Rs.14.38 crores in a full year. I propose
further to levy fresh Excise Duties of Rs.500 per metric tonne on unwrought lead and
zinc and suitable adjustments are being made in respect of zinc manufactures. The
duty on copper ingot and copper manufactures will be raised by Rs.500 per metric
tonne. The additional excise and countervailing import duties on non-ferrous metals
will yield revenue of Rs..9.50 crores in a full year. Thus the total revenue from the
additional Excise Duties, including countervailing duties of Customs of the order of
Rs.12 crores, is estimated at Rs.54 crores in a full year out of which about six crores
or so will be the States’ share.
Taking Customs and Excise Duties together and exclusive of the States’ share,
the additional revenue would thus be of the order of Rs.167 crores in a full year or just
over Rs.100 crores over the rest of the current financial year.
A sizeable part of these additional duties will be borne by Government and
public sector units. It is my intention to absorb the increased cost as far as possible
through economies in expenditure.
The additional import duty proposed on machinery and equipment win, I hope,
promote import substitution through larger output of the machinery industries in India.
In order to offset the increased cost of machinery in part, while retaining the incentive
for the greater use of indigenous equipment, I propose to raise the rate of development
rebate in respect of certain priority industries from 25 per cent to 35 per cent. Coal
mining is being added to the list of priority industries. For all other industries, I
propose to extend by three years, i.e. upto 31st March, 1970, the period of operation
of the general rate of 20 per cent after which the lower general rate of 15 per cent, will
be operative. Similarly, in order to avoid delay in the implementation of priority schemes
in progress in the private sector, it is proposed to grant additional assistance in
appropriate cases through financial institutions.
Honourable Members will also recall that in keeping with the high priority for
agriculture, I have proposed a lower import duty of 15 per cent for agricultural
machinery as well as a reduction in the excise duty on light diesel oil. For the same
reason, I also propose to remove the existing excise duty on stationary diesel engines
of 10 hp and less which are generally used for agricultural purposes, as also to
provide a small sum for the grant of subsidy to the actual buyers of such engines for
use in agriculture.
8

The House will be aware that Government has announced the commodities for
which tax credit certificates will be granted against export earnings, as also the rates
applicable. A number of Honourable Members have made the point that the exporter
should not have to wait for a period of 12 months before receiving payment of the tax
credit certificates; and I propose to eliminate this waiting period.
The Finance Bill also includes amendments to the Income-tax Act, Estate Duty
Act, Wealth-tax Act, Gift-tax Act and Companies (Profits) Surtax Act. Most of these
amendments are in pursuance of the announcements made by me while moving the
Finance Bill, 1965 for the consideration of this House. Briefly put, these amendments
will have the effect of extending the operation of the existing 5-year tax holiday
concession for industrial undertakings newly set up in India to such undertakings
going into production any time during the 5-year period commencing from 1st April,
1966; exempting from tax the bonus received by individuals on cumulative time deposits
in the post office; charging of tax at a concessional rate on the interest received by
individuals on the encashment of the recently issued National Savings Certificates
(First issue), and of authorising the payment of interest on these Certificates without
deduction of tax at source. The Bill provides for the exemption of the recently issued
7 per cent Gold Bonds 1980 from wealth-tax and the capital gains arising on the
transfer of such bonds from income-tax and enabling payment of the interest on such
bonds without deduction of tax at source in certain cases m the same lines and subject
to the same conditions as already apply in respect of the 61/2 per cent Gold Bonds
1977. Power is also proposed to be taken for the grant of cash refund of excess
annuity deposits in certain circumstances.
With a view to facilitating the economic rehabilitation of Ladakh, I propose to
exempt persons other than Government employees resident there from tax on their
income from sources in Ladakh and outside India, upto and inclusive of the assessment
year 1969-70. It is also proposed to write off arrears of outstanding tax from such
persons for assessment years prior to 1962-63. The amount of such arrears of tax is
about Rs.40,000 only.
Among the other amendments proposed to these Acts I would only mention the
following, namely, a provision to exempt from income-tax the commuted value of
pension, exemption of professional associations like Bar Councils from income-tax
on their enrolment fees and subscriptions, power to the Commissioner of income-tax
to waive or reduce the minimum penalty leviable under the Wealth-tax Act in cases of
voluntary disclosure of wealth and immunity from prosecution in such cases, increase
in the rate of simple interest chargeable on delayed payments of tax and payable by
Government on delayed refunds under the Wealth-tax Act and Gift-tax Act from 4 per
cent to 6 per cent and a provision enabling , the Central Government to enter into
agreements with foreign Governments for avoidance of double taxation of income in
relation to surtax. Donations made for a charitable purpose qualify for a rebate of
9

income-tax. Recently, a High Court has taken the view that a charitable purpose may
also include a religious purpose. This is, however, not in accordance with the intention
underlying the provision. It is, therefore, proposed to clarify that a charitable purpose
will not include a purpose which is wholly or mainly religious in nature. This
amendment will have effect in respect of donations made on or after 1.4.1964. Similar
amendments are proposed to be made in the Gift-tax Act and the Estate Duty Act. I
would mention that there are independent provisions in the income-tax Act and in the
Gift-tax Act for rebate of income-tax and exemption from Gift-tax in respect of
donations or gifts to temples, mosques, churches, gurdwaras, etc. These provisions are
not being changed by the proposed amendments.
Honourable Members will recall that in regard to the voluntary disclosure scheme
under the Finance Act, 1965, which was in operation for three months upto 31st May,
1965, it had been suggested in this House that the period allowed for payment of the
tax should be extended, Under the structure of that scheme, it was not possible to meet
this suggestion except to a very limited extent. I now propose to introduce a fresh
scheme for voluntary disclosure of unaccounted income which will be in operation
from today until the 31st March, 1966. One of the distinctive features of this scheme
is that tax will be charged on the whole of the disclosed income taken as a single
block, at the rates prescribed for personal income or corporate income by the Finance
Act, 1965, and not at an ad hoc concessional rate. Further, facilities will be allowed
for payment of the tax in appropriate instalments extending over a period not exceeding
four years, subject to a down payment of not less than 10 per cent of the tax due and
furnishing of security in respect of the balance. Income which has already been detected
on materials available prior to the date of the disclosure will, however, be assessed
under the regular provisions of the income-tax Act and not under this scheme. Any
admissions made by a person in the declaration filed by him under the scheme in
respect of such income will not be used against him in assessing that income under the
Income-tax Act. Under this scheme also, the disclosed income will not be subject to
any further proceedings of assessment. The identity of the declarant will not be revealed
and he will also be immune from penalty and prosecution for the past concealment of
the disclosed income.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am well aware that my proposals represent a formidable fare
for a supplementary budget. But the exigencies of the situation demand nothing less.
Our current needs, the claims of the Fourth Plan and the ever-increasing threat to our
national security add up to a challenge which has to be met squarely and with a
resolute heart. I can only hope that I have succeeded in presenting proposals which
carry forward the process of rationalising our tax-structure while responding to the
paramount need for raising progressively higher revenues for sustaining the dynamism
and soundness of the economy.
(Augustl 9, 1965)
10

