SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R. DESAI, MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1960-61

Sir,
I beg to present the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Government of India for the year 1960-61.
2.
The usual Economic Survey reviewing the major developments in the
economy during the current year and indicating broadly the outlook for the coming
year has been circulated along with the budget papers. I propose here to dwell only on
such aspects of the economic situation as have a direct bearing on the budget for the
coming year.
3.
Agricultural production recorded a large increase in 1958-59 and there
has been a marked recovery in industrial production in recent months. Despite these
encouraging trends in production, both wholesale prices and the cost of living have
shown a significant rise. The foreign exchange reserves held by the Reserve Bank
have maintained a measure of stability during the year. There has been some
improvement in export earnings and some reduction in imports, but the major factor
in the stability of our foreign exchange position has been the larger availability of
external assistance. The trends in money supply and credit indicate that the expansionary
impulse in the economy has been fairly strong. The stock markets have been buoyant
particularly throughout the year. These pointers, taken together, indicate the need in
the coming year for active vigilance in regard to domestic price trends and continued
austerity in imports backed by accelerated effort to step up exports.
4.
The investments undertaken in the last few years are beginning to yield
results and we should expect substantial increases in output in the coming years. At
the same time the demands for domestic consumption and investment are increasing
while the urgent need to build up exports remains. It is essential in this situation to
ensure to the maximum extent possible that aggregate demand does not outstrip the
supplies available. 1960-61 is the last year of the Second Five-Years Plan, and care
must be taken to see that the economy is in a state of healthy balance when the year
ends and the Third Plan commences.
PRODUCTION
5.
The prospects for agricultural production in the current year are good.
Despite floods in some parts of the country and drought in some others, the Kharif
crop is expected to be about as good as last year, and the Rabi sowings so far have
been satisfactory. Food production in 1959-60 will, it is hoped, be around the same
high level as last year, although some reduction in the output of raw cotton and jute
is likely.
1

6.
Industrial production has shown an increase of about 7.4 per cent over the
first ten months of 1959. This is a substantial improvement over the rate of increase
of 1.7 per cent in 1956 and 3.5 per cent in 1957. A notable feature of the year was the
increase in the production of iron, steel and aluminium which together accounted for
over a third of the rise in the index of industrial production. Among the other industries
which recorded substantial increases in output were automobiles, diesel engines,
machine tools, sugar machinery, superphosphates, soda ash, cement and paper and
paper board. The output of mill cloth was about the same as in 1958, although the offtake was distinctly larger partly on account of the revival of export demand. The
production of handloom and powerloom cloth went up by about 100 million yards.
The production of jute manufactures over the year was slightly lower than that in
1958, but it has been looking up since September last. Although the foreign exchange
position continues to be tight, It has been possible to ensure, by and large, that industrial
production is not hampered on that account. Actually, the increase in industrial
production has been larger than the index would suggest, as the industries which have
come into existence after 1951 are not included in that index.
7.
In part, the increase in industrial production mentioned earlier has been
on account of fuller utilisation of capacity. But there has also been expansion in
installed capacity in a number of industries such as iron and steel, aluminium, paper,
basic chemicals, cement, power-driven pumps, sewing machines and bicycles. Progress
is being made in the production of finished machinery and equipment as well. The
construction of the first phase of the heavy electrical project at Bhopal is nearing
completion and it has been decided to accelerate the remaining phases of the project
and to provide for substantial expansion. The capacity of the heavy machinery project
at Ranchi is also to be expanded so as to produce 80,000 tons of machinery a year. A
number of plants for fertilisers, drugs and pharmaceuticals and intermediates are also
being established and will go into production during the Third Plan period. The
industrial potential of the country has grown considerably over the last few years, and
is becoming rapidly more diversified. Government are anxious to see this process
carried through further. Small-scale industries have also continued to receive
encouragement and support from Government, and certain steps to assist banks to
make larger loans to small industries are under consideration.
8.
Indian shipping continued to expand steadily during the year. The total
gross tonnage under the Indian flag at the end of 1959 was about 7,40,000 which is
expected to reach the Plan target of 9 lakh tons by the end of 1960-61. With the
establishment of the Shipping Development Fund in the current year, Indian shipping
companies have now a permanent source from which to obtain rupee finance for their
development. In the present context of a shortage of foreign exchange, it is important
to develop the Merchant Fleet and save the large amount paid as freight in foreign
exchange. I hope that in this effort we shall receive co-operation and assistance from
foreign ship-owners, who have had an earlier start and that restrictive practices, which
hamper the full utilisation of our shipping tonnage will be given up.
2

MONETARY TRENDS
9.
The rate of increase in money supply which had slowed down in 1958
picked up again in 1959, the increase in the course of the year being Rs.170 crores, as
compared to Rs.76 crores in the previous year. The increase in bank credit to
Government was smaller in 1959 than in the previous year. On the other hand, the
contractionist effect of the transactions of the private sector with the banking system
was smaller and the foreign exchange reserves which had shown a decline in the
previous year went up in 1959.
10. The deposit resources of scheduled banks increased by Rs.254 crores in
1959. The addition to the investment of these banks in government securities was
Rs.151 crores as compared to Rs.204 crores in 1958. The net borrowings of the
scheduled banks from the Reserve Bank were small and except during periods of
pressure for funds, money rates generally tended to remain at lower levels. The
maximum deposit rates fixed in October 1958 under a voluntary agreement among the
larger banks’ were lowered by 1/2 per cent in September 1959.
11. The stock markets were buoyant for most of the year and the gilt-edged
securities maintained a firm trend. Several of the new industrial issues during the year
were over subscribed. The index of variable dividend industrial securities, which had
risen by 14 per cent in 1958, rose further by about 17 per cent during 1959. While, in
a growing economy the capital markets should reflect confidence and optimism, it is
essential to keep a watch on any unhealthy speculative tendencies.
PRICES
12. The general index of wholesale prices has shown a rise of about 41 per
cent over the twelve months ending January 1960. The index for rice came down from
108 in November 1958 to 92 in March 1959, but it rose again to 112 by October.
There was a seasonal decline to around 101 by December 1959. The index was 104.3
at the end of January 1960. Wheat prices at the end of last month were about 25 per
cent lower than about a year ago. While on the whole, the indices for cereals and
pulses have shown a fall, ‘food articles’ as a group have gone up, mainly because of
the rise in the prices of edible oil, gur and tea. Industrial raw materials went up more
sharply and the index for manufactures has also shown an upward trend in recent
months. The All-India cost-of-living index for December 1959 was 124 as compared
to 122 a year earlier.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
13. As I mentioned earlier, the Reserve Bank’s sterling assets have been
relatively stable, their level on 19th February 1960 being Rs.203 crores, as compared
to Rs.211 crores a year earlier. During this period we made the gold payment towards
the enlargement of our quota in the International Monetary Fund and repurchased
from it rupees equivalent to $20 million. Welcome as this improvement is, it must be
borne in mind that basically our current earnings are far short of, our payments, and
the gap is being met by foreign loans and credits.
3

14. For the year 1958-59 the current account deficit in the balance of payments
was Rs.339 crores as compared to Rs.476 crores in 1957-58. Imports were lower by
Rs.157 crores; imports on private account showing a fall of Rs.176 crores while
Government imports rose by Rs.19 crores. Export earnings in 1958-59 were about
Rs.19 crores less than in 1957-58 due mainly to recessionary conditions abroad. Receipts
on account of official donations and other invisible items were less in 1958-59 by a
crore as compared to 1957-58. The current account deficit of Rs.339 crores was met
by capital inflow of Rs.320 crores and by a drawing down of foreign exchange reserves
by Rs.19 crores. Allowing for a net outflow of Rs.23 crores on account of miscellaneous
transactions the total fall in reserves, however, came to Rs.42 crores.
15. For the first half of 1959-60 the current account deficit was Rs.142 crores
as compared to a deficit of Rs.211 crores in the first half of 1958-59. The improvement
was accounted for by an increase in export earnings of the order of Rs.19 crores and
a reduction in imports amounting to Rs.53 crores. The receipts on account of official
donations were, however, Rs.3 crores less. As against a deficit of Rs.142 crores, foreign
exchange reserves were drawn down by Rs.27 crores, the balance being met mainly
by external assistance.
16. While on the subject of the balance of payments and foreign exchange
reserves, I would like to mention that we had drawn in 1957 from the International
Monetary Fund, a credit of $ 200 million, including a stand-by-credit of $ 72.5 million.
Under the Fund rules, a stand-by-credit is repayable within three years. We have,
therefore, repaid $ 50 million during this month and propose to pay the balance of $
22.5 million in June 1960.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
17. As the House is aware, a Conference of friendly countries was convened
by the World Bank in March 1959 to discuss how India could be assisted to meet the
foreign exchange requirements of the current Plan. Following this Conference, the
United Kingdom Government granted a loan of £ 19 million, about Rs.25 crores. The
United States Government sanctioned a further loan of $ 20 million, about Rs.91/2
crores, from the Development Loan Fund in July 1959 for the import of steel for
projects in the private sector. An agreement under P.L.480 was signed with the United
States Administration in November 1959 for import of foodgrains, and other agricultural
commodities valued at $ 257 million, about Rs.122 crores. Canada has authorised
grants totalling $25 million, about Rs.11 crores for import of wheat, raw materials,
fertilisers and scientific equipment. During the current financial year the World Bank
sanctioned further loans totalling $ 85 million, about Rs.401 crores. Three agreements
were signed during the year with the U.S.S.R., for loans and credits totalling 1680
million roubles, about Rs.201 crores. The bulk of this assistance is towards the Third
Plan. The Government of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia have also agreed to extend
credits upto Rs.23 crores and Rs.19 crores respectively during the Third Plan period.
4

18. As in previous years, we have continued to receive assistance under the
Colombo Plan from countries like Australia, Canada and New Zealand. We have
received technical assistance from the United Nations Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, other specialised agencies of the United Nations and the IndoFrench technical co-operation programme. We have on our side, also given assistance
to friendly countries. Our economic and technical assistance to Nepal under the
Colombo Plan is expected to amount to R9.1.33 crores during the current year. We
have provided scholarships and training facilities for overseas students and sent a
large number of experts to help the Governments of these countries.
19. I attended the annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the Bank
and the Fund in Washington in September-October 1959. At their meeting, the Board
of Governors of the Bank adopted the U.S. proposal asking the Bank’s Executive
Directors to consider the broad principles on which an International Development
Association as an affiliate of the World Bank should be established and to formulate
the Articles of Agreement of this Association for submission to the membergovernments. The purpose of the Association would be to promote economic
development in less developed areas by providing additional finance on terms which
will bear less heavily on the balance of payments position of the borrowing countries.
The Articles of Association for the International Development Association have now
been drafted and will be considered by member-governments.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1959-60
20. I shall now deal with the revised estimates of the current year and the
budget estimates of the coming year.
21. The budget for the current year estimated the revenue at Rs.780.10 crores
and expenditure met from revenue at Rs.839.18 crores leaving a revenue deficit of
Rs.59.08 crores. On the trend of actuals the revenue is now estimated at Rs.838.66
crores and expenditure at Rs.854.05 crores, leaving a deficit of only Rs.15.39 crores.
22. The improvement of Rs.58.56 crores in revenue is due mainly to better
collections under Customs and Union Excises. Customs receipts are now estimated to
go up from Rs.132.77 crores to Rs.160 crores; our original estimate, based largely on
the trend of actuals for 1957-58, has proved to be too conservative. Union Excises
would yield Rs.350.82 crores against the budget estimate of Rs.324.32 crores. With
the progressive increase in production the revenue has shown an all round improvement,’
notably under steel ingots, cement and tyres and tubes. The enhancement in the duty
on mineral oils during the year has also contributed to this improvement. The revenue
from income Tax including Corporation Tax is likely to go up by Rs.5 crores but the
yield from Wealth Tax, Expenditure Tax and Gift Tax taken together, will be less by
Rs.1.6 crores. The surcharge on iron and steel which is transferred to the Iron and
Steel Equalisation Fund, is likely to yield Rs.9 crores more while grants from the U.
S. Government under the PL 480 programme will be Rs.13 crores less.
5

23. Civil Expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs.610.35 crores against
the original budget of Rs.596.50 crores and Defence Expenditure at Rs.243.70 crores
against the original estimate of Rs.242.68 crores.
24. The increase of Rs.13.85 crores in Civil Expenditure is the net effect of
variations over a number of heads. Debt services are now estimated to cost Rs.7.26
crores more due chiefly to larger payments for interest on external loans. Transfer to
the Steel Equalisation Fund of the surcharge on Iron and steel accounts for an increase
of Rs.9 crores. Expenditure on displaced persons is more by Rs.5.48 crores due to the
conversion of certain outstanding loans into grants and to larger provision for transfer
of sale proceeds of evacuee property, which are taken in reduction of the Capital
expenditure on the payment of compensation to displaced persons. Payment of States’
share of Union Excise Duties is now expected to exceed the budget provision by
Rs.2.30 crores following the expansion of revenue. Provision has also been made for
payment to the States of a grant of Rs.3.46 crores to compensate them for the loss in
their share of income-tax following the changes in the company taxation this year.
These increases would be partly counterbalanced by a drop of Rs.13 crores in the
grants from U.S.A. under P.L.480 programme to be transferred to the Special
Development Fund
25. The revised estimate of the net Defence expenditure on revenue account
during the current year shows an increase of Rs.1.02 crores over the budget. This is
made up of an increase of Rs.6 crores under the Air Force, offset by reductions in the
Navy and in Non-effective charges and by a slight increase under “Receipts and
Recoveries”. The increase in the Air Force budget is mainly due to liabilities carried
over from 1958-59 m stores purchased from abroad and new proposals sanctioned
during the course of the year. The reduction in expenditure on the Navy is mainly due
to less expenditure m stores. The provision made for temporary increases in pensions
of Service personnel under “Non-effective Charges” is unlikely to be required this
year and has been included in the budget for the next year.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1960-61
26. Before dealing with the estimates for the coming year, I would like to
mention one or two matters which affect the estimates of that year. The first relates to
a major change in the financial arrangements between General Revenues and Posts &
Telegraphs. The surplus of Posts and Telegraphs Department, after payment of interest
on the capital at charge, has so far merged in the General Revenues. Part of the
surplus is treated as an outright contribution to General Revenues and the balance is
retained pro forma by the Department on which an abatement of interest is allowed.
These arrangements were recently reviewed particularly against the background of the
need to encourage the Department to build up adequate reserves against its growing
capital investment. With rapid expansion and technological advantage, the pace of
capital investment of the Department has increased considerably in recent years, the
6

total capital at charge having risen from Rs.38 crores in 1948-49 to Rs.121 crores at
the end of last year. But the accretions to the Renewals Reserve Fund have not been
adequate with the result that replacements have to be partly financed from interestbearing capital. It has, therefore, been decided to place the P&T Department with
effect from next year in the same position as the other great commercial department of
Government, viz. Railways vis-a-vis General Revenues. The Department would in
future pay a dividend to the General Revenues at the rate in force from time to time
for the Indian Railways on the mean capital at charge during the year. The balance of
the surplus after payment of the dividend, will be retained by the Department for
strengthening its Reserves, particularly the Renewals Reserve Fund.
27. The second matter concerns the Central Pay Commission. The Commission
which was appointed in August, 1957, to enquire into the structure of emoluments and
conditions of service of Central Government employees submitted its Report in August,
1959. The decisions of Government on some of the major recommendations of the
Commission were announced in Parliament on the 30th November, 1959. The other
recommendations of the Commission are being examined and Government’s decisions
thereon will be announced as early as possible. The annual expenditure for Government
as a whole on the Implementation of the recommendations of the Commission, including
the interim relief already granted, is of the order of Rs.44 crores, which is likely to
rise ultimately to Rs.55 crores roundly per annum. The recommendations of the
Commission accepted by Government take effect from the 1st July, 1959, but no
provision is being made in the revised estimates for the current year on this account
as the payments will all be made in 1960-61. The budget for that year thus includes
more than a year’s provision for this expenditure.
28. Honourable Members had expressed some concern last year about the
growth of Civil expenditure. The question of securing maximum possible economy
consistent with efficiency and avoiding wastage in public expenditure has continued
to receive close attention. The reports of the various teams of the Committee on Plan
Projects and the Special Re-organisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance have been
made available to Parliament from time to time. A continuous watch over the growth
of expenditure, particularly non-developmental expenditure, is kept by the Central
Economy Board and the Internal Economy Committees set up in the various Ministries.
Studies of particular sections of activity in each Ministry have been initiated with a
view to improve the methods of work and secure economy with efficiency. Government
have imposed a ban for one year m the creation of fresh posts and the filling up of
vacant posts unless they are related to the Plan or are required for security purposes.
Ad hoc cuts have also been made in the provision for travelling allowances.
29. For the next year, on the basis of existing taxation, the revenue is estimated
at Rs.896.45 crores and expenditure at Rs.980.35 crores, leaving a deficit of Rs.83.90
crores on revenue account.
7

30. The revenue from Customs has been assumed at the same level as the
current year’s revised estimate of Rs.160 crores. Union Excise Duties are estimated at
Rs.358.91 crores, an increase of Rs.8.09 crores over the revised estimate, which allows
for the progressive increase in production and a full year’s revenue from the increases
levied during the current year. The receipts from income Tax and Corporation Tax are
likely to improve by Rs.10 crores. Revenue from Wealth Tax will decline by Rs.5
crores due to the merger of the tax on companies in their income tax. Apart from the
increase of Rs.1.43 crores in the sale proceeds of opium, the revenue from the other
principal heads is not expected to differ materially from the current year’s revised
estimates. Interest receipts would go up by Rs.7.44 crores mainly due to the anticipated
receipt from two steel companies and the Khadi and Village industries Commission.
Of the other major variations, mention may be made of an increase of Rs.7 crores. In
the receipt from the surcharge on iron and steel and Rs.8 crores in grant from the
U. S. Government under the P. L.480 programme. But these increases will be partly
set off by a drop of Rs.4 crores in the contribution from the Posts & Telegraphs
following the revised arrangements mentioned earlier. The share of income-tax payable
to the States next year shows a decrease of Rs.27.26 crores as a result of the merger
of company income tax in Corporation Tax, but as I mentioned in my speech last year,
it is the intention to make good the loss to the States by a specific grant till the next
Finance Commission reports on the allocation of income-tax and necessary provision
is being made in the expenditure estimates for this purpose. The profits of the Reserve
Bank have been taken at Rs.40 crores, the same as in the current year.
31. Expenditure nextyear is estimated at Rs.980.35 crores of which Rs.272.26
crores will be on Defence Services and Rs.708.09 crores under the Civil heads.
32. Civil Expenditure next year shows an increase of R9.97.74 crores over
the revised estimates. Expenditure on Debt Services is likely to be Rs.9.45 crores
more on account of the progressive increase in the internal and external debt.
Development and Social Services, including Community Development, are expected
to cost Rs.27 crores more in the terminal year of the current Five Year Plan. The two
self-balancing items of surcharge m iron and steel and grants from the U. S.A. under
P.L.480, for which corresponding credits are assumed in the revenue estimates, account
for an increase of Rs.15 crores. Ad hoc grants to the States to compensate them for
the’ loss in their share of income tax next year would be Rs.28 crores more. The rest
of the increase is spread over a number of heads. Detailed explanations for these
variations have, as usual, been given in the Explanatory Memorandum.
33. Defence expenditure next year is estimated at Rs.272.26 crores against
the revised estimate of Rs.243.70 crores, an increase of Rs.28.56 crores. Army estimates
show an increase of Rs.26.75 crores and Navy estimates Rs.3.46 crores, while the
expenditure on Air Force will be Rs.2.94 crores less. Non-effective charges show an
increase of Rs.1.29 crores. The overall increase in the Defence expenditure is mainly
due to the additional commitments of the Armed Forces, the further expansion of the
8

Territorial Army and the National Cadet Corps and the provision for increased payments
to Defence personnel on the basis of the recommendations of the last Pay Commission.
As I have mentioned elsewhere, the provision included in the current year under noneffective charges for an increase in the rates of small pensions to Service personnel
has been carried over to the coming year. The reduction in the Air Force estimates is
mainly due to the inclusion in the current year’s revised of substantial amounts m
account of liabilities carried over from the previous year.
34. The estimates of the Defence Services have been prepared against the
background of the present threat to our borders and I am sure the House will not
expect me to dilate at any length on the measures which have been taken and are
under consideration for safeguarding the territorial integrity of the country. It may be
that later in the year, if circumstances necessitate It, I may have to come before this
House for additional funds; but I have no doubt that Government will have the support
of all sections of this House in taking all the measures necessary for ensuring the
security of the country.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
35. I shall now give a brief account of the provision made in the estimates for
capital outlay. The current year’s budget provided for a total capital outlay of Rs.420.14
crores, excluding the adjustment for the transfer of capital assistance from the United
States to the Special Development Fund which is notionally treated as capital
expenditure. The revised capital requirements are now estimated at Rs.362.85 crores,
a decrease of Rs.57.29 crores. The savings occur mainly under two heads. The Railways
now expect to spend only Rs.85.03 crores against the original estimate of Rs.121.81
crores. Net expenditure on purchase of foodgrains shows a fall of Rs.21.01 crores due
mostly to larger sale proceeds and recoveries.
36. Against the revised estimate of Rs.362.85 crores for capital outlay this
year, the next year’s provision stands at Rs.370.84 crores. If the special item of Rs.95.24
crores in the current year for payment of additional subscription to the International
Monetary Fund is excluded, the capital requirements next year exceed the current
year’s revised estimate by Rs.103.23 crores. This increase is spread over a number of
heads and reflects the additional allotments to fulfil the Plan targets during the last
year of the Plan. Outlay on industrial development, mainly on coal and oil development,
would cost Rs.30.56 crores more. The Railways and Posts and Telegraphs would also
be spending Rs.35.78 crores and Rs.3.60 crores more respectively than in the current
year. Foodgrains transactions would also involve an increase in the net outlay of
Rs.19.41 crores.
37. In addition to the direct capital outlay just mentioned the estimates provide
Rs.283.18 crores this year and Rs.331.51 crores next year for loans to States and
Rs.221.74 crores this year and Rs.176.74 crores next year for loans to other parties
including Port Trusts, Government owned Corporations and foreign Governments.
9

38. Next year’s estimates include a total provision of Rs.889 crores for
implementing the Plant Rs.173 crores in the revenue budget and Rs.716 crores in the
Capital budget. Out of this provision, Rs.64 crores in the revenue budget and Rs.175
crores in the capital budget are for assistance to the States. In addition, the Railways
will be spending Rs.34 crores from their own resources and the States Rs.251 crores.
Thus the total Plan outlay in 1960-61, including interest on loans on river valley
projects which are added to capital during the period of construction and short-term
loans, will amount to Rs.1,174 crores.
39. During the three years ending 1958-51 the total Plan outlay by ‘ the Central
and State Governments together was of the order of Rs.2,450 crores. The budget
provision on this account for the current year is Rs.1,121 crores and the next year’s
outlay as mentioned already is estimated at Rs.1,174 crores. After allowing for the
usual shortfall in expenditure, the actual outlay in the public sector over the five-year
period will be near about Rs.4,600 crores. Investment in the organised private sector
is expected to reach the total envisaged in the Plan; it may even slightly exceed this.
In irrigation, power, industry, mining and transport as also in the field of social services,
the achievements will, I feel sure, be impressive.
WAYS AND MEANS
40. The current year’s budget provided for a net expansion of treasury bills of
Rs.237 crores of which Rs.15 crores were expected to be issued to the public. On the
latest trends, the net expansion is now estimated at Rs.190 crores. The improvement
of Rs.47 crores is due to several factors.The revenue deficit is now expected to be
Rs.44 crores less than estimated. Capital expenditure, as explained earlier, will show
a saving of Rs.57 crores and other debt heads an improvement of Rs.32 crores. This
improvement of Rs.133 crores will be partly counter balanced by a decrease of Rs.71
crores in external loans and additional provision of Rs.15 crores required to raise the
closing cash balance to the normal level of Rs.50 crores.
41. The borrowing envisaged by the budget was carried through successfully.
In the budget I had taken credit for a market loan of Rs.225 crores; the actual receipts
amounted to Rs.229 crores. Two loans were floated in July 1959; the 31/2 per cent
Bonds 1969 at an issue price of Rs.98.85 and the 4 per cent Loan 1979 at par.
Conversion facilities were offered to the holders of the 3 per cent Second Victory
Loan 1959-61 and the 21 per cent Hyderabad Loan 1954-59 which were due for
repayment during the year. The total subscriptions to these loans amounted to Rs.184
crores, of which Rs.89 crores came by way of conversion. Later, to meet the demand
for investment from the market, it was decided to create further issues of 3J per cent
Bonds 1969 for Rs.25 crores at Rs.99.4 and of 33/4 per cent Loan 1974 for Rs.20
crores at Rs.99.65. In accordance with the usual practice, these issues were taken over
by the Reserve Bank on its investment portfolio for being sold in the market later.
10

42. Hon’ble members will recall that in the Budget Speech for 1958-59 mention
was made of the proposal for the gradual funding of a part of the Treasury Bills held
in the issue Department of the Reserve Bank. A beginning was made in July 1958
when, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, Treasury Bills of the value of Rs.300
crores were funded. This process was continued during the current year when a further
Rs.150 crores worth of Treasury Bills were funded into dated securities.
43. Small Savings have shown a steady Improvement in recent years. The
net collections of Rs.78 crores during 1958-59 were the highest reached so far. This
year they are expected to go up to Rs.82 crores against the budget estimate of Rs.85
crores. While the response has been encouraging, the collections are still far short
of the average of Rs.100 crores a year envisaged in the Plan. The Small Savings
movement is more than a routine device for mobilising savings. It has a great
psychological appeal in providing an opportunity for the ordinary man and woman
to participate in the national effort for development. I would, therefore, appeal to
every family in this country to save more and contribute its share in making the
movement a greater success.
44. I may mention, at this stage, certain steps taken by Government during
the year to popularise the savings movement. The House will remember that in the
last session, legislation was promoted to provide the facility of nomination to depositors
in the Post Office Savings Bank and holders of Savings Certificates. A new Pay Roll
Scheme has been introduced for the benefit of the employees in large establishments
and factories which permits deduction to be made from the wages, with the consent of
the employees, for investment in Small Savings. The National Savings Advisory
Committees at the Centre and in the States have been merged with the Savings Boards
of the Women’s Savings Campaign and constituted into composite Boards, one at the
Centre and one in each State, with adequate representation of women workers. The
various agency systems for the sale of Savings Certificates have been reviewed and
rationalised and a standardised agency system, both for the urban and rural areas is
expected to be introduced shortly. The Commission due to the agents is at present
claimed and disbursed through the treasuries which are always not easily accessible,
particularly in the rural areas. To meet this difficulty, the responsibility for the payment
of the commission is proposed to be transferred to the post offices in the coming year.
45. In response to suggestions made from various quarters from time to time,
Government have decided to issue Prize Bonds. The notification setting out the terms
will issue tomorrow and the Bonds will be placed on sale from the 1st April next. The
issue will be in the form of bearer bonds in two denominations of Rs.100 and Rs.5.
The bonds will not carry interest and will be repaid after five years but the holders
will participate in quarterly drawal of prizes, which will be free of income tax. The
total number of prizes to be awarded every quarter will be 40 in respect of each series
of one lakh units of Rs.100 bonds, the prizes ranging between Rs.25,000 and Rs.500.
11

In the case of each series of ten lakh units of Rs.5 bonds, the number of prizes offered
every quarter would be 278, the prizes ranging between Rs.7,500 and Rs.50.
46. For the next year’s budget, credit has been taken for a market borrowing
of Rs.250 crores including the receipts from the prize bonds which I just mentioned.
The net credit from Small Savings has been taken at Rs.90 crores allowing for a
small increase of Rs.8 crores over the likely receipts this year. According to the
latest information available, foreign assistance next year is expected to amount to
Rs.362 crores.
47. The overall budgetary position next year may now be summarized. At the
existing level of taxation, there will be a revenue deficit of Rs.84 crores. Capital
outlay will amount to Rs.371 crores, loans to State Governments and others to Rs.531
crores and debt repayments to Rs.140 crores. This total disbursement of Rs.1.126
crores will be met to the extent of Rs.250 crores from market borrowing, Rs.90 crores
from Small Savings, Rs.362 crores from foreign assistance, Rs.128 crores from loan
recoveries and Rs.119 crores from miscellaneous receipts, leaving a deficit of Rs.177
crores, which will be met by the expansion of treasury bills.
DEVELOPMENTAL PLANNING
48. Before I deal with the problem of covering the large revenue deficit in
sight, I should like to say a few words on the implications of planning for development;
for, It is in relation to these that all our budgets have to be framed. The essential
objective of our plans is to lift the economy from stagnation and to get it moving
forward to higher levels of production and better standards of living. We embarked on
this task some ten years ago, and we shall be completing the Second Plan by the end
of the next fiscal year. In this period, our economy has made notable advances in
several directions. One has only to look at the major industrial projects which are
coming up and see something of the varied programmes of rural development that
have been and are being implemented to realise the growing dynamism of the economy.
Economic development is not, for us, a vague or remote ideal; it has to be part of our
daily thought and work. Undoubtedly, we have had our share of difficulties, and, I
have no doubt, we shall continue to have some hereafter. These difficulties and stresses
and strains are a part of the process of economic and social growth.
49. At the end of the Second Plan the country would have reached a level of
development at which it can hardly afford to halt. It is vital that the pace of development
is not merely maintained but accelerated. This is the essential task of the Third Five
Year Plan. The first pre-requisite of success for this is increased agricultural production.
This is axiomatic and we cannot afford, even for a moment, to lose sight of it. But,
other sectors of the economy, like industry, mining, power, transport and
communications have also to be developed rapidly if the economy is to grow at a
rapid enough pace over the next 10 or 15 years. The Third Five Year Plan has to keep
this perspective in view.
12

50. It is perhaps a platitude to say that in this country we face all the time a
crisis of resources in developing our economy. But I would be failing in my duty if I
do not stress the point that mobilising the resources required for this is not going to be
easy and will entail progressively harder work and larger sacrifices by all sections of
the community. There will be need also for substantial external assistance. We are
anxious to make the period of dependence on special external assistance as short as
possible. I am not referring here to the normal flow of external capital, this, I hope,
will continue. Private capital is apt to flow in more readily when the foundations of
development have been well laid out. The scope for foreign investment in India will
thus grow. But, our aim is to get as early as possible to a stage where the bulk of our
investment programmes is based on the domestic output of capital goods and equipment.
How far we can advance in this direction depends upon a number of factors, of which
the availability of sufficient foreign exchange in the next few years is the most crucial.
I feel I am right in saying that the needs of developing economies are now increasingly
appreciated in the more advanced countries, and I am confident that, provided we as
a nation put in the best effort we can, the necessary support from abroad will be
forthcoming. What is vital, at this stage, is a clear recognition of the urgency of
economic development, for preserving and strengthening the democratic values we
cherish and the realisation that such development is not possible unless some restraint
is kept on consumption and we submit ourselves to a high degree of fiscal and monetary
discipline.
51. I now turn to the proposals for dealing with the revenue deficit for the
coming year.

PART B
52. Honourable Members may recall that while presenting the budget proposals
for the current year, I placed before the House certain broad considerations which
Government took into account in deciding the extent to which the revenue deficit of
a year should be covered by additional taxation. I suggested that the long era of
revenue surpluses was perhaps coming to a close; for the first time the actuals for
1958-59 have disclosed a small revenue deficit of Rs.5 crores. I also suggested that
exceptional circumstances affecting the deficit of a year should be taken into account
in deciding upon the extent to which the deficit should be covered and that due regard
should be given to the amount of additional taxation raised in recent years. I also
ventured to underline the need for the continuous mobilisation of resources for financing
the increasing needs of planned development. The considerations I placed before the
House last year apply with equal force to the budget of the coming year and although
the large revenue deficit next year is due, in the main, to larger outlay on development
in the last year of the present Plan and the increased requirements of Defence in the
interests of national security, I am convinced that a part of the deficit should be
13

covered by additional taxation. As in the current year, I propose that about a fourth of
the deficit in sight, may be covered by new taxation.
53. In framing the taxation proposals for the coming year, I have had in mind
something more than the immediate needs of that year. I mentioned earlier the
continuous need to raise additional resources for development. In the context of planned
development, it is essential, in dealing with the budgetary needs of each year, to think
in terms of broadening and adjusting the bases of taxation so that the revenue raised
continues to expand with the years. The proposals for the coming year, particularly
those widening the base of taxation, have been formulated with the needs of the Third
Plan in view. While direct taxation will be kept under constant and continuous review
so as to make it yield the maximum resources, the bulk of the expansion in taxation
will have to come from indirect taxation.
INDIRECT TAXATION
54. In the field of indirect taxation, my proposals cover both the adjustment
of rates of existing taxes and the levy of taxes on certain new commodities. The
proposals are explained in detail in the memorandum circulated with the budget papers
and I propose to mention them only briefly.
55. My first proposal is to levy a duty of Rs.200 per metric tonne on tin plates
and tinned sheets. Suitable adjustments would be made where duty paid steel is used
in their manufacture. The yield in a full year is estimated at Rs.208 lakhs.
56. My second proposal is to impose a small duty of Rs.10 per metric tonne
on pig iron. Pig iron used in the manufacture of steel will be exempted from the duty,
which is expected to yield Rs.60 lakhs a year.
57. My third proposal is to levy a duty of Rs.500 per metric tonne on aluminium
steets and circles and Rs.300 per metric tonne on aluminium ingots. Necessary
adjustments will be made in the duty on circles, sheets, etc., when duty paid ingots are
used in their manufacture. The estimated yield is Rs.86 lakhs.
58. My next proposal is to levy a duty of 10 per cent ad valorem on all types
of internal combustion engines used as prime movers for transport vehicles. A lower
rate of 5 per cent ad valorem will be charged on stationary types of these engines
which are generally used in industry and for agricultural purposes. The yield is estimated
at Rs.107 lakhs a year.
59. I also propose to levy a small tax m certain essential cycle parts. A duty
of Rs.2 on each free wheel and Rs.4 on each rim will be levied. This will ensure the
realisation of Rs.10 of each completed cycle without bringing into the excise net a
large number of small assemblers of cycles and manufacturers of cycle parts. The
annual yield is estimated at Rs.100 lakhs.
14

60. Electric motors and parts thereof are not now subject to tax. It is proposed
to levy a duty ranging from 5 per cent to 15 per cent ad valorem on various types of
motors used for different purposes., The revenue from this is estimated at Rs.46 lakhs
a year.
61. A duty on exposed cinematograph films is also being levied. It will vary
from 10 naye paise per metre to 50 naye paise per metre depending on the type of the
films. News reels and shorts would be subject to the lower rate of duty. The yield from
this is estimated at Rs.75 lakhs.
62. My last proposal for new excises relates to silk fabrics m which a duty of
30 naye paise per square yard will be levied. The handloom sector will not be affected
by this measure which is expected to yield Rs.30 lakhs.
63. I shall now turn to the readjustments in the existing rates of duty on
certain commodities.
64. The House will remember that in 1956 an excise duty was levied on the
larger passenger motor cars while all commercial vehicles and small and medium
cars, motor cycles and scooters were not taxed. I now propose to levy a duty ranging
up to 15 per cent ad valorem on all types of motor vehicles. The total revenue is
estimated at Rs.625 lakhs.
65. Refined diesel oil was made subject to duty in 1956 when a tax at 25 naye
paise per imperial gallon was levied. Although the tax has since been raised to 80
naye paise per imperial gallon, the consumption of this commodity has been increasing
rather rapidly. The growing imbalance between the internal production and consumption
of this commodity is causing a considerable drain on the foreign exchange resources
of the country. I, therefore, propose to raise the basic rate of duty by a further 25 naye
paise per imperial gallon. This will bring in a revenue of Rs.504 lakhs a year.
66. Complete footwear manufactured in power operated factories was subjected
to an excise duty in 1955 but a large number of small scale units were kept out of the
scope of the taxation. Some of the larger units are reportedly adopting a deliberate
policy of decentralisation to evade taxation. Mainly to protect the revenue, I propose
to levy an excise duty on machine made soles and heels made of materials other than
leather or wood. The rate of duty win be 15 per cent ad valorem and will yield a
revenue of Rs.20 lakhs a year.
67. In the field of textiles, I propose to make two changes with some revenue
significance. I propose to remove the existing total exemption on fabrics produced
from staple fibre yarn and cut pieces of cotton textiles, the so-called fents. The former
win now be treated on par with artificial silk fabrics. In the case of cut pieces, the
present definition is being revised and small specific duties, at levels substantially
below the fabric rates, will be levied. These changes are estimated to yield Rs.195
lakhs a year of which Rs.65 lakhs will accrue to the States.
15

68. Electric fans, bulbs and batteries were first made subject to excise in
1955 and no change has since been made in the rates of duty on these commodities.
The production trends indicate that these lines are expanding and they can bear an
increase in taxation. I propose to raise the existing duties by 50 per cent with a suitable
increase in the duty on components. These changes will yield a revenue of Rs.90 lakhs
a year.
69. The tea industry has been complaining of the difficulties caused to it by
the imposition of a number of taxes at various stages by different agencies. We propose
to explore the possibility of removing this hardship by a suitable readjustment of the
excise duty, bearing in mind the financial interests of the State Governments concerned,
and the need to secure that their resources are not adversely affected. To enable this to
be done, we are raising the permissible maximum limit of the excise duty from 19
naye paise to 30 naye paise per lb. This is merely an enabling measure and does not
involve any change in the effective rates of the duty now imposed ranging, as the
House is aware, from 2 naye paise to 12 naye paise per lb.
70. A few other minor readjustments are also being made about which 1 need
not weary the House. The total financial effect of these changes is to bring in an
additional revenue of Rs.27 lakhs a year of which Rs.5 lakhs will accrue to the States.
71. The net affect of the various measures which I have mentioned is to increase
the revenue by Rs.21.73 crores, of which Rs.70 lakhs will accrue to the States.
72. With regard to customs duties, I propose to make no change except for an
increase in the duty on wines and spirits and other alcoholic liquors. Following the
changes in excise duties, provision is being made, wherever necessary, for the levy of
a countervailing import duty, so that the indigenous producer is not placed at a
disadvantage. The changes in the customs levy are estimated to yield a revenue of
Rs.2.5 crores in the coming year.
DIRECT TAXATION
73. I now turn to direct taxation. I do not propose to make any change in the
rate structure of personal income tax. With regard to company taxation, steps are
being taken to implement in its entirety the new scheme of company taxation introduced
in the current year’s budget. Formal action is being taken to abolish the Wealth Tax on
companies and the tax relating to excess dividends with effect from the financial year
commencing on the lst April, 1960.
74. The House will remember that last year, for purposes of advance payment
for the assessment year ending the 31st March, 1961,1 had provisionally adopted a
rate of 45 per cent for company taxation. We have not had sufficient experience of the
effect of this rate. I do not, therefore propose to make any change in this rate but to
adopt it as the final figure. Smaller companies with a total income not exceeding
Rs.25,000 will continue to be assessed at a figure 5 per cent less. Last year I had
16

promised to consider certain matters connected with the new system of company
taxation, and I am making two provisions in the Finance Bill, one relating to the
assessment of dividends paid out of profits taxed in the past and the other relating to
taxes on companies holding less than 50 per cent share in the capital of another
company, and have taken them into account in my estimates of revenue.
75. I propose to make two changes in regard to the deduction of tax at
source. The House will remember that it was decided last year that tax should be
deducted at source at a rate of 30 per cent on dividends paid to resident individuals
and at 45 per cent on dividends paid to Indian companies. It has been represented
that this difference in the rate of deduction at source has given rise to some difficulties.
I therefore, propose to apply a uniform rate of 30 per cent for deduction of tax from
both the individuals and companies. In order that this change may not affect the
revenue receipts, I propose to amend Section IBA so as to enable Government to
collect from Indian companies the remaining 15 per cent as advance tax on the
dividends received by them.
76. The existing provision with regard to the deduction at source from
dividends paid to preference shareholders also appears to be causing some difficulty.
The amount of the dividends which companies are required to pay to the shareholders
is governed by the terms of their contract with them and Government would not like,
as the current Finance Act implies, to make any assumptions regarding such amounts.
I accordingly propose in the Finance Bill to provide for the deduction at source from
the payments to these shareholders as in the case of any other dividends, leaving the
actual amounts of these dividends for the companies themselves to decide.
77. I would now briefly refer to a few other proposals to amend the incometax Act. The period for which exemption is available under section 15C to new industrial
undertakings is proposed to be extended by a further five years. The limit up to which
donations for charitable purposes qualify for exemption from tax is proposed to be
increased from 5 per cent of total income or Rs.1,00,000 whichever is less, to 71 per
cent of total income or Rs.1,50,000 whichever is less. At present, the amounts paid to
scientific research associations and educational institutions to be used for scientific
research are allowed as deductions in computing the business income of the donor if
the scientific research is related to the class of business carried on by him. It is proposed
to allow this deduction even if the scientific research is not related to such business.
In respect of properties constructed before 1st April, 1950, the full amount of taxes
levied by a local authority and borne by the owner, is proposed to be allowed to be
deducted in computing the taxable income from the property, as against half the amount
of such taxes allowed at present. My next proposal is with regard to the taxation of cooperative societies. At present, the business income of such societies is exempt from
tax. This exemption is justified having in view the objective of the Co-operative
Societies Act of 1912, namely, to facilitate the formation of co-operative societies for
17

the promotion of thrift and self-help among agriculturists, artisans and persons of
limited means. However, as the House is aware, of late, co-operative societies have
widened their fields of activity and are carrying on substantial business involving
transactions of a large scale with non-members. There is no justification for a complete
tax exemption of business profits in their case. It is, therefore, proposed that while the
business incomes of co-operative societies connected with agriculture, rural credit
and cottage industries should continue to be wholly exempt from tax, the business
incomes of other societies should be exempt only up to a sum of Rs.10,000. These
proposals will not materially affect the revenue.
78. A few amendments of a comparatively minor character are proposed to
Expenditure Tax and Gift Tax Acts. The amendments to the Expenditure Tax Act
provide for allowances for expenditure incurred on leave travel in India as well as
education of children in India. It is also proposed to allow in full the taxes paid by an
assessee to a foreign government instead of only a portion as at present. The amendment
to the Gift Tax Act provides that the advance tax payable will be at the same rate as
the tax payable on regular assessment. These changes are not expected to have any
significant effect on revenue.
NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
79. I may now summarise the net effect of the budget proposals. The changes
in the Union Excise duties, exclusive of the revenue accruing to the States, are expected
to bring in an additional revenue of Rs.21.03 crores. Changes in the customs duties,
largely consequential on the changes in Union Excises, are expected to bring in Rs.2.5
crores. The total additional revenue would thus stand at Rs.23.53 crores, reducing the
revenue deficit from Rs.83.9 crores to Rs.60.37 crores and the overall deficit from
Rs.177 crores to Rs.153 crores. I propose to leave the revenue deficit uncovered; the
overall deficit will be met by the expansion of treasury bills.
CONCLUSION
80. Next year’s budget would cover the last year of the current Plan and 1
would like to mention briefly what the position at the end of that year would be so far
as the implementation of the present Plan is concerned. In an earlier part of my speech,
I mentioned that at the end of the budget year, the total Plan outlay would have
reached a figure of about Rs.4,600 crores. During the current Plan period, we have, at
the Centre, raised substantial sums of revenue for meeting our Plan commitments
including the assistance provided to the States from the revenue budget. Over the
period of five years covered by the Plan, I expect that we would have an accumulated
revenue surplus of over Rs.50 crores, after meeting all our commitments for the Plan
and providing very substantial assistance to the States for implementing their Plans. I
know that there has been some criticism about the extent to which we have had to
resort to deficit financing for meeting the capital expenditure of the Plan. Even here,
I venture to suggest that our record has not been as bad as some of our critics make
18

out. In the first three years of the Plan, the total amount of deficit financing amounted
to Rs.885 crores or so. In the current year, assuming that the State Governments do
not contribute to this in any significant measure and they are unlikely to do so, the
amount of deficit financing is likely to be Rs.190 crores. Taking a figure of Rs.153
crores for the coming year, the total amount of deficit financing during the Plan period
would have amounted to only a little over the sum of Rs.1,200 crores envisaged in the
Plan. Although our performance in the matter of savings has not been as, good as we
could wish, our record in the matter of raising resources and limiting deficit financing
to the minimum amount possible and practicable, has, I think, been quite good.
81. There is, however, no reason to take a complacent view of the situation.
The end of the Second Plan merely marks the beginning of the Third Plan which will
require greater efforts and larger sacrifices on the part of the community if the country
has to sustain, as it inevitably must, a larger Plan. The path of our progress is bound
to be difficult until our economy gets over the hump and becomes self-generating.
Until this position is reached, which one might hope may be at the end of the next
Plan, we shall have to strain every nerve to mobilise the maximum resources, from
both taxation and savings, to enable the country to make the progress that is imperative
to our survival. It is perhaps a truism to say that no one, much less an under-developed
country like ours, can stand still or stay stagnant. We have to move forward and make
whatever sacrifices are necessary for this. I have no doubt that this will be done and
I would ask the House to consider the budget, which I am placing before it, against
this background.
(FEBRUARY 29, 1960)

19

