SPEECH OF SHRI R.K. SHANMUKHAM CHETTY, MINISTER OF
FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1948-49
When I presented my Interim Budget for Free India’s first Parliament a few months
back, our nation had been shaken to its very foundations by the great Punjab tragedy.
Thousands of our people had been brutally butchered, and millions of innocent men,
women and children driven out of their ancestral homes and forced to make a dusty,
deadly trek in search of a new home. Our crying concern then was to dress the wounds
of uprooted humanity, and to mobilise all our financial resources to set aright an unhinged
economy. Our new found freedom, however, weathered the storm, and as the eve of my
first annual Budget approached, I could see a silver lining around the cloud. Then,
suddenly, like a thunderbolt that rends the sky and spins the globe, calamity struck us
once more and orphaned our infant State and enveloped the. country with a darkness
even more complete. The hand that nailed Jesus to the Cross reached out of the evil
recesses of history once again and slew the latest in the line of Prophets. Along with
Bernard Shaw one wonders “Must then a Christ Perish in torment in every age to save
those that have no Imagination” In Mahatma Gandhi the world has lost an uplifting
standard, our nation its Founding Father, - and each one of his friend, philosopher and
guide. Many ran up to him in times of stress, national or personal, and came back with
renewed confidence. Our fledgling freedom felt warm and secure under the protective
wing of Gandhiji. The way ill fortune has dogged our heels makes one doubt whether
our people had made a tryst with disaster rather than with destiny. But that is a most unGandhian mood; for he remained cheerful and buoyant and hopeful even in the darkest
hour. Indeed I rise today under a shadow but I know it is the shadow of his Cross, and so
I feel confident that our nation will be prepared to meet the great challenge of the
situation. In the faith that looks through death we shall shape the destiny of our nation
on the pattern which he cherished and lead it from the dark abyss of hatred and despair
to the sunlit pastures of eternal life.
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
2.
The third year after war finds the world still in the meshes of those economic
maladjustments which are the inevitable aftermath of total war - the nemesis that
inexorably pursues the victor and the vanquished alike. Western Europe is still in a sad
plight and intolerable economic conditions prevail in many of the devastated areas. The
efforts at rehabilitation by the United Nations Organisation and the United States
Government have so far borne little fruit. All hope is now centred round the Marshall
Plan. But its gestation is unduly delayed, and it has worsened the already strained relations
between the Big Three. The United Kingdom is making a heroic effort to rehabilitate
her war torn economy and shattered trade. There has been serious economic dislocation
in many Asian countries owing to violent internal struggles or fight for freedom from
1

foreign domination. Thus, over a large part of the world, economic conditions are still
worse than in wartime, production has fallen, even below pre-war levels in some cases,
and prices have been soaring to new heights. The world food situation is still a cause for
serious anxiety, while the world’s population has increased by about 200 millions since
1939, the total food production has fallen by 7 per cent. At the same time, there has
been a tremendous increase in the money in circulation. The many high powered
international bodies lately set up for rectifying the world’s currency and food troubles
have so far made little headway. In the result, inflation is still holding the world in its
firm grip and the standards of living of the great majority of the world’s population
remain at depressingly low levels. Especially in Asian countries, the economic situation
has greatly deteriorated owing to violent internal struggles and the consequent dislocation
of normal economic activity.
3.
There has been no material change in the general economic conditions in
our own country since I reviewed them last when presenting the budget for the current
year last November. The dislocation caused by the mass migration of people between
Western Pakistan and India still remains to be surmounted and only the fringe of the
problem of rehabilitating the millions of people who have crossed over to India has so
far been touched. While active steps are being taken to provide the necessary financial
assistance to the refugees to enable them to start on. useful careers in their new
surroundings, the process of rehabilitation is necessarily bound to take some time. The
budget for next year provides a substantial amount for relief and rehabilitation and the
House may rest assured that everything possible will be done to place these refugees in
useful occupations as early as possible. It is not merely a matter of humanitarian relief
but one of economic investment, for the sooner these people, many of whom are skilled
workers and agriculturists with experience, are placed in occupations in which their
productive capacity would add to the wealth of the community the better for the country.
In this task of rehabilitation the Government of India are working in close co-operation
with the neighbouring States and Provinces and the plans for their relief and rehabilitation
are being drawn up In co-ordination with them.
4.
The food position still continues to cause anxiety and conditions have
definitely become worse in large parts of the Madras Presidency following the failure
of the monsoon. Steps are being taken to make additional supplies available but the
position is bound to be difficult until the new harvest comes on the market. It is not
necessary for me to explain in detail the reasons which led to the policy of gradual
decontrol of food which was approved by this House. The effects of this policy on the
internal sources of supply still remain to be seen but if the expectation behind this
policy that it would bring more supplies to the market and, to that extent, reduce our
dependence on foreign imports is realised, it would be completely justified.
5.
In my speech last November I mentioned the rising trend of prices as the
most unwholesome feature in our economic situation. This, as I explained then, was the
result-of a number of factors some of which like the accumulation of surplus purchasing
2

power in the hands of the community, have been in operation for some time while the
an round fall in production, both industrial and agricultural, was of more recent origin.
I stressed then the need for increasing production in every possible way and I gave
details of the steps taken to promote the Increase of textile production as an example of
what the Government are striving to do. But the House must realise that any substantial
increase in production is impossible until the shortage of materials, the bottleneck in
transport and other impediments are removed. If the increase in production requires the
Import of equipment from overseas, this again takes time to obtain and is also limited
by considerations of foreign exchange on which the more urgent requirements of food
have necessarily the first claim. These difficulties are inherent in the situation but it
does not necessarily follow that Government are doing nothing in the matter. One serious
hindrance in the way of production, even with the available resources, has been the
frequent disputes between capital and labour, resulting in strikes and other interruptions
of work. If the recent truce agreed upon between capital and labour for a period of three
years in the recent Industries Conference can be implemented in letter and spirit, the
way would be clear for a considerable increase in production.
6.
A view that has in recent years become almost unanimous among economists
and financiers is that each year a Government’s financial policy should be so planned
as to rectify the economic maladjustments of the time, and to serve as a compensatory
device to offset fluctuations in the private sector of economy. In a time of inflation,
budgets should not only be balanced but there should he a comfortable surplus for
mopping up the excess purchasing power and encourage economy in private spending.
On the other hand, when a depression is on, Government should launch bold schemes
of public expenditure and should boldly budget for a deficit if necessary.
7.
An inflationary pressure resulting from too much money chasing too few
goods has been the keynote of our present economy, and there is no indication that a
reversal of this trend is in sight. At such a juncture, we should exert every nerve to
budget for a surplus, if possible, by increasing revenue and curtailing expenditure. The
methods by which these aims are achieved are important, because as the present phase
of inflation is due to an abundance of spending power without the goods to spend on,
we must see that a surplus is achieved in such a way as to curtail spending and create
suitable incentives for increasing production. In other words, the tax-burdens laid must
be met by cutting down expenditure on consumption and not by saying less. Similarly,
the borrowing made must be from genuine savings and not from inflated bank credit.
The practical application of these principles is indeed difficult, but we must bear them
in mind in shaping our financial policy.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
8.
I should like to draw the attention of the House to a matter which has been causing
some concern to Government, namely, the emergence, in recent times, of a substantial
adverse balance in India’s external payments. India’s balance of trade has in the past
always been substantially in her favour, the surplus of exports over imports being used
3

by her to meet the interest and amortisation charges on her sterling debt, to pay the
pensions and leave salaries of British officers and to make other invisible payments
such as the remittance of the profits of foreign investments in India and banking insurance
and shipping charges. During the war years India’s balance of trade became even more
favourable than before, due not only to restrictions on her imports on account of war
time conditions, but to the large payments which accrued to her on account of supplies
and services to the allied nations and the Defence Expenditure Plan. The result of India’s
earning, both visible and invisible, being vastly in excess of the expenditure, was the
rapid accumulation of our sterling balances. Part of these balances was used to purchase
the Indian railways and to repatriate compulsorily almost the whole of the Indian sterling
debt; part was used through Indian nationals acquiring British investments in India. All
these measures served greatly to lessen the annual drain on India while the interest
earned on the sterling balances added in some measure to our income. If, therefore, all
the other factors in the situation had been the same, India should have had now A
substantially more favourable balance of payments than she had before the war.
9.
Far from having a favourable balance, however. India had in the first postwar year, 1946-47, a substantial deficit in her balance of payments on current account.
The tendency which then manifested Itself for the first time still continues and had it
not been for the restrictive import policy which was introduced in June 1947 the deficits
we have had would have been substantially greater. The reasons for this are two-fold.
Firstly, it is the- inevitable result of the absence of imports during the many years of
war that the long pent-up demand should seek to satisfy itself as soon as goods become
available. This is true not only of consumer goods but also of producer goods and plant
and equipment, the arrears of maintenance of which have to be made good as soon as
possible if production is not to he interfered with. The second, and by far the more
important, reason for this deficit is, as is well known, our imports of foodgrains. India
has of course been a regular importer of food for many years but quantities and prices
have both been recently going up. In 1944-45 and 1945-46 the value of foodgrains
imported into India was Rs. 14 crores and Rs. 24 crores respectively. In 1946-47 the
figure was Rs. 89 crores. These figures are In addition to the import of supplementary
food articles which cost a further Rs. 15 crores in 1946-47. In 1947-48 the amount
expected to be spent on the import of food grains is Rs. 110 crores.
10. The money required for the purchase of food is of course a first charge on
our available foreign exchange resources. These consist of our export earnings and of
our sterling balances but on the latter we have necessarily to draw in moderation. These
resources are not sufficient to finance both the heavy drain caused by food imports as
well as to pay for all the other Imports we should like to purchase. As food must have
the highest priority we have necessarily to restrict the import of other commodities. It is
undesirable that this should be so, particularly at a time when inflationary tendencies
persist in the country. It is, therefore, imperative for us to take all the steps in our power,
not only to increase the production of food in this country so as to reduce imports, but
4

to increase production in every other field of economic activity so that it may be possible
to increase our export income without reducing home consumption. I fear, however,
that in spite of all the action that may be taken in this direction it will take a few years
before it will be possible for India to bring her foreign payments into equilibrium, and
that, therefore, it will be necessary to continue with our present restrictions on imports.
11. It will be appreciated that, with India’s limited resources of hard currencies,
it would have been impossible to continue the policy of now-discrimination regarding
the source from which Indian imports came, which was a feature of Indian import
policy during the last half year. Hon’ble Members will remember that I indicated to
them in my last Budget Speech that the dollar shortage would cause us to re-impose
discrimination and I fear that we have had in framing the import policy for the present
half year, to make the most drastic cuts in imports from the hard currency areas. It is
unfortunate that this has to be so, for we are being compelled either to do without a
large number of useful articles which are obtainable only in the hard currency area or to
pay for them a higher price in the soft currencies. As long, however, as the world dollar
shortage caused by the disequilibrium in world trade continues, I fear we have no
alternative but to proceed on the basis which has been in force ever since the war broke
out and to which we have now had to revert. I am, however, glad to be able to report to
the House that we have been able slightly to decrease the rigour of the import control
from the sterling and other soft currency areas which we had imposed during the last
half year. It was neither desirable nor indeed possible to continue import control from
all over the world with that degree of restriction which we had introduced, for not only
would it have led, if continued for any length of time, to an increase in the inflationary
potential but would also have interfered with production.
12. One other recent trend in our external financial position is deserving of
special mention. Till 1945-46 not only did we have an overall favourable balance of
payments bit we were in substantial surplus with the U.S.A. Since 1946-47 that situation
has also changed, both because goods have become much more freely available in that
country and because we have to purchase there a substantial portion of our food
requirements. In 1946-47 our deficit with the U.S.A. was Rs. 15 crores. In the subsequent
months it increased substantially, being Rs. 131 crores and Rs. 22 crores respectively
for the second and third quarters of 1947. Preliminary figures for the two months October
and November disclose a deficit of Rs. 14 crores. With the other hard currency countries
the position is no better and during the period April to November 1947 our deficit with
them has been Rs. 151 crores. Our total net earnings of hard currencies during the
period September 1939 to November 1947 were about Rs. 37 crores.
13. The most important lesson to be drawn from a study of our external financial
position is that so long as food imports continue on the present scale, we would be
confronted with the problem of an adverse balance of payments and the disequilibrium
in our economy will persist. Such a state of affairs will be a source of anxiety and even
danger. The only way to redress the balance is to increase the internal production of
5

food. While an expansion of our export trade will go a long way to mitigate the
seriousness of the problem, it will be impossible to bridge the gap by exports alone. It
will be observed that, though I have indicated the trends in our external financial position,
I have not given any figures for our overall deficits in the balance of payments. This is
for the simple reason that such figures have so far not existed, though steps have now
been taken to see that they are collected in future. I would, nevertheless, like to give the
House some idea of our position as it is likely to be during the first half of 1948 and
propose to mention certain figures on the clear understanding that these are to be taken
more as an indication of the magnitude of the figures involved than of the actual figures
as they are likely to be. Forecasts of balance of payments are notoriously liable to be
inaccurate because of the uncertainties of the factors involved; but in preparing the
forecast for the first six months of 1948 we have suffered from the additional handicap
that it is impossible to say what effect the partition of the country will have on its
external trade and that there are no past actuals to guide us. The figures I shall mention
relate to the balance of payments on current account of the Dominion of India with the
rest of the world excluding Pakistan. For our balance of payments with Pakistan, I fear
it is not possible to make even the roughest of estimates. In the half year January to June
1948 we hope to earn through exports and other sources Rs. 208 crores. We expect to
spend during the same period Rs. 260 crores. We therefore anticipate an overall deficit
of Rs. 52 crores. Out of our total expenditure during the half year, no less than Rs. 61
crores will be spent on the purchase of food.
14. Hon’ble Member will appreciate more fully in the light of what I have
stated above the significance of the second interim agreement on the sterling balances
which has been concluded between the Government of India and the Government of the
United Kingdom by an exchange of letters. In brief, the effect of the exchange of letters
is that the financial agreement dated 14th August 1947, which expired on the 31st
December 1947, has been extended up to 30th June 1948 with some modifications. The
first agreement was on behalf of both India and Pakistan but the present extension is on
behalf of the Dominion of India alone. Hon’ble Members will remember that in December
last, when an agreement was reached between Pakistan and ourselves on all outstanding
financial issues including the division of the sterling balances, it was agreed that from
the 1st of January 1948 the exchange accounts of the two countries should be kept
separately. As a consequence of this separation, it was also agreed that negotiations for
a further interim settlement between the United Kingdom and the two Dominions should
be carried on separately by each. Hence Pakistan was not a party to our recent
negotiations.
15. The object that we kept in view in our recent discussions with representative
of the United Kingdom Government was to make available to us sufficient foreign
exchange resources to meet our estimated overall deficit in the balance of payments
during the first half of 1948. As I have indicated earlier, we estimate our overall deficit
for this period at £ 39 million or RS. 52 crores. It has been agreed that a further £ 18
6

million (or Rs. 24 crores) will be transferred from Account No. 2 to Account No. 1, the
existing balance in which will, of course, be carried forward at our disposal except for
a certain amount to be transferred to Pakistan under the Indo-Pakistan Agreement of
December last. This fresh transfer, together with the balance that we have at our disposal
under various accounts and some borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.
will enable us to meet our anticipated deficit. As our Account No. 1 would now stand,
I have no anxiety on account of the external financial position of the country so far as
currencies other than the hard currencies are concerned.
16. One important feature of the new agreement is the limit on convertibility.
Under the original agreement the whole of our sterling in Account No.1 whether it
arose by transfer from Account No. 2 or through the proceeds of current earnings, was
fully convertible for current transactions into any currency including that of the U. S.A.
In other words, the whole of the sterling that we held in Account No. 1 was multilaterally
convertible. Under the present agreement, however, we have been put to the necessity
of limiting our right to multilateral convertibility to the extent of only £ 10 million or
Rs. 13.33 crores. This restriction will necessitate our borrowing to some extent from
the International Monetary Fund. I am, however, satisfied that the extent of our borrowing
from the Fund during the current half-year will be well within the limits of our rights of
borrowing from that Fund. Hon’ble Members are entitled to know why we agreed to
limit the right to full multilateral convertibility which is possessed by every member of
the sterling area. The answer is that, like all international agreements, this agreement
was a compromise, and in the light of the circumstances that faced us I consider it in the
best interests of the country to accept this condition. I am not unmindful of the great
difficulties under which the United Kingdom is labouring today, nor am I unappreciative
of the valiant efforts being made by that great country to restore equilibrium in her
economy and to discharge her international obligations. I am fully aware that the gold
and dollar resources of the sterling area are small, are rapidly being exhausted and
require to be husbanded with the greatest care. It Is for this reason that we agreed last
September, soon after our first interim agreement was concluded and when the United
Kingdom was forced to suspend the convertibility clause in the Anglo-American Loan
Agreement, to co-operate by restricting dollar expenditure as far as possible. For the
half year in question our expenditure in hard currency has been severely limited to
essentials. Nevertheless, I cannot help feeling that it should have been possible to avoid
introducing this very undesirable and harmful principle of a limit on the convertibility
of sterling for members of the sterling area who are pledged to holding sterling without
limit of amount. We have honoured that pledge perhaps even beyond the bounds of
prudence. Even from the point of view of the necessity for safeguarding the central
reserves of the sterling area, I cannot feel happy about the low limit of convertibility
forced upon us. After all, our proposed drawings on the central reserves were the merest
fraction of what the United Kingdom herself proposed to draw therefrom. Undesirable
as this feature of the agreement is, we accept it in the hope that it would be possible to
remove this condition at the earliest possible moment. We have decided in fact to make
7

a long term settlement with the United Kingdom on this vexed question as soon as
possible. I feel that it is unsatisfactory that there should be negotiations every six months
on this subject for the element of uncertainty as to the results of these periodical
negotiations makes it impossible for any long term co-ordinated trade policies to be
formulated. I have, therefore, conveyed to the Leader of the British Delegation my
desire that steps should be taken for initiating talks for a long term agreement.
FINANCIAL SETTLEMENT WITH PAKISTAN
17. When I gave a brief account to the House in my last Budget Speech of the
details of the partition and its financial and economic results, I mentioned that a number
of important points connected with the partition still remained unsettled and were likely
to be referred to arbitration. As the House is aware, these outstanding questions have
been the subject of further consultation between the two Governments and all of them
have been settled so that so far as the two dominions are concerned, it became
unnecessary to resort to arbitration on any issue. Now that a final settlement has been
arrived at although the details would necessarily take some time to work out, I propose
to give the House a short account of these decisions.
18. The position of the undivided Government as on the date of partition was
that its outstanding liabilities exceeded its assets so that ultimately it is the debt that is
being divided between the two Governments. On a rough estimate the outstanding debt
of the Central Government as on the 14th August, 1947, including in this not merely the
outstanding public debt but all its obligations to outside parties such as deposits in
Postal Saying Banks, outstanding balances of Post Office Cash and National Savings
Certificates, Provident Fund Deposits of Government servants, the amount likely to be
paid to the British Government for surplus stores and other property acquired by the
Defence Services and the capitalised value of the liability for pensions in payment on
the date of partition and pensions earned by serving officers upto that date, is likely to
be of the order of Rs. 3,300 crores. The Government of India’s assets on that date are
represented by the capital spent on the great Commercial Departments like the Railways
and the Posts and Telegraphs, the Security Printing Press, the irrigation works in the
Centrally Administered areas, the Port of Vizagapatam and New Delhi; the buildings,
stores and equipment of the Defence Services and the various branches of the Civil
Administration; the cash balance with the Reserve Bank and investments such as the
Silver Redemption Reserve and the subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund
and the International Bank; and the miscellaneous debts due to it such as the outstanding
loans made to Provincial Governments and local bodies and institutions. The total value
of these assets is of the order of Rs. 2800 crores leaving a net excess of liabilities over
assets of about Rs. 500 crores. As I said earlier, it will be some time before the final
figures are available and the machinery for obtaining them as early as possible is being
set in motion. The arrangement with Pakistan is that for all assets located in her territory
such as the Railways and the Posts and Telegraphs system operating in Pakistan, the
stores and other movable equipment allocated to her, the administrative buildings and
8

installations taken over by her in her territory she takes a debt equal to the book value of
these assets. An exception has been made in the case of strategic railways the book
value of which for purposes of the settlement, will be written down from a little over
Rs. 32 crores to Rs. 14.45 crores. In addition, Pakistan will take over a debt equal to the
amount of the cash balance of Rs. 75 crores allocated to her out of the cash balances of
the undivided Government and 171 per cent of the net excess of the Central Government’s
liabilities over assets which, as I mentioned earlier, is likely to be of the order of Rs.
500 crores. The total of Pakistan’s debt as calculated above will be reduced by the
liability she takes over direct in regard to Postal Savings Banks, Postal Cash and National
Savings Certificates outstanding in her area, the pensions of the undivided Government
paid in Pakistan and the liability for pensions earned by officers who have opted for
service in that Dominion. For purposes of the financial settlement the outstanding debt
of the Central Government will be valued after taking into account the interest payments,
discounts, the date of redemption and so on. Similarly the actuarial value of the
pensionary liability will have to be calculated. The closing of the accounts for the prepartition period, without which the outstanding assets and liabilities cannot be
determined, will also take some time to complete. It is not therefore possible to give
anything more than a very rough indication of the amounts involved in the settlement or
the share of Pakistan in the outstanding debt. Pakistan’s share will take the form of an
inter-state debt to India. On a very rough estimate this debt is likely to be of the order of
Rs. 300 crores and the rate of interest may be near about 3 per cent. Pakistan’s total debt
is to be repaid in Indian rupees in fifty annual equated instalments for principal and
interest. As a measure of assistance to the new Dominion in its earlier years it has been
agreed that the first repayment should commence only in 1952. In addition to the Rs. 75
crores given to her out of the cash balance of the undivided Government it has also been
agreed that India would make available to Pakistan a further sum of Rs. 6 crores for
meeting the expenditure on the setting up of Ordnance factories and similar special
institutions required by her. This amount will also be added to Pakistan’s debt. With
this settlement, the terms of which, as the Deputy Prime Minister has already told the
House, are generous and conceived in a real spirit of assistance to Pakistan, the purely
financial problems arising out of the partition may be said to have been satisfactorily
solved.
19. The allocation of the sterling reserves that the Reserve Bank will hold when
it ceases to be the currency authority and banker to the Pakistan Government on the
30th September next also raised difficult issues and I am glad to say that a satisfactory
solution has been reached here also. It has been agreed that out of the sterling assets in
the Issue Department, Pakistan would receive:- share in the proportion of the notes in
circulation in Pakistan. In addition she would also be entitled to 171/2 per cent of the
excess of the sterling held by the Reserve Bank on the 30th September 1948 in both the
Banking and Issue Departments after allowing for the payment to be made to the British
Government for surplus military stores and fixed assets and the capitalised value of
pensions paid in sterling and for the retention of a reserve in the Issue Department
9

which, together with the gold, would be equal to 70 per cent of the liabilities. This
additional sterling will be released to Pakistan by India, as and when required, till the
31st December 1967, against payment in Indian rupees.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1947-48
REVENUE
20. I shall now proceed to give a brief review of the financial position in the
current and the ensuing years.
In my Interim Budget I estimated the deficit for the current year covering 71/2 months at
Rs. 24.59 crores. The House will be glad to know that I now estimate the deficit at only
Rs. 6.52 crores. The improvement is due to some increase in the anticipated revenue
and a decrease in expenditure.
21. The revenue receipts during the period 15th August, 1947 to 31st March
1948 are now estimated at Rs. 178.77 crores against Rs. 172.8 crores in the Budget
passed by this House last November. The improvement of nearly Rs. 6 crores is mainly
due to an increase of Rs.2.35 crores under Customs and windfall of Rs. 3 crores from
the levy on old stock of cloth released for sale at increased prices following the recent
decontrol of textiles. The estimates also include Rs. 2.25 crores on account of
Government’s share in the increased prices of sugar, stocks of which were frozen by
Government when sugar was decontrolled last December, and Rs. 2 crores on account
of the receipts of the Cotton Textiles Equalisation Fund. The Revenue under Central
Excise Duties is now estimated to show a reduction of Rs. 1.36 crores compared with
the budget, mainly under Sugar and Tobacco. The total revenue from Taxes on Income
including Corporation Tax is now estimated at Rs. 115 crores, a reduction of Rs. 3
crores in the original estimate. The divisible pool of income-tax is now estimated at
Rs. 65.49 crores of which the Provincial share would amount to Rs. 29.74 crores. The
credit of Rs. 2.25 crores on account of the increase in sugar prices mentioned above
will however be set off by a corresponding provision in the expenditure estimates as the
intention is to fund these receipts for the benefit of the industry and the sugar producing
provinces. Similarly the receipts of the Cotton Textiles Equalisation Fund will be
transferred to it by provision in the expenditure estimates.
EXPENDITURE
22. The total expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs. 185.29 crores showing
a reduction of Rs. 12.1 crores in the original estimate. The expenditure on Defence
Services is expected to show a saving of Rs. 6.11 crores, Civil estimates accounting for
the balance of Rs. 5. 99 crores.
23. The current year’s budget for Defence Services included a substantial
provision for new schemes and for the acquisition of land but owing to changes in the
plans on strategic and other considerations and the pre-occupation of the Defence
authorities with matters such as the operations in Kashmir to repel the invaders from
that State, it is expected that a saving of Rs. 5.75 crores is likely to be effected this year.
10

The budget also included a provision of Rs. 1.68 crores for payment to an Equalisation
Fund for the replacement of certain vessels of the Royal Indian Navy and aircraft of the
Royal Indian Air Force. On further consideration it has been decided that this contribution
should wait until conditions become more stable and the provision on this account will
accordingly lapse.
24. The saving of Rs. 5.99 crores in Civil expenditure is mainly due to a
reduction in the provision for expenditure on the relief and rehabilitation of refugees.
The House will remember that a lump sum of Rs. 22 crores was provided for this
purpose in the budget. At that time when the large scale movements of population were
still taking place it was impossible to frame a close estimate of the expenditure likely to
be involved. On the indications then available, I considered it advisable to provide a
substantial figure. The position has since been reviewed and although it is still difficult,
in view of the constant changes in the position and the fluid nature of the relief plans, to
make a close estimate it is now expected that the expenditure this year may not amount
to more than Rs. 14.89 crores. A saving of Rs. 2.36 crores is also expected in the provision
of Rs. 22.52 crores for subsidies on imported foodgrains. Interest charges are also
expected to show a saving of Rs. 1.29 crores. These savings are partly set off by the
provision of Rs. 2.25 crores for funding the special receipts following the decontrol of
sugar and the provision of Rs. 2 crores for the transfer to the Cotton Textiles Equalisation
Fund of the receipts realised for it, both of which I have mentioned earlier.
FINANCIAL YEAR, 1948-49
25. I now turn to the estimates for 1948-49. At the existing level of taxation, I
place the total revenue for the year at Rs.230.52 crores and the expenditure charged to
revenue at Rs. 257.37 crores leaving a deficit of Rs. 26.85 crores. Before I deal with the
detailed estimates, I must warn the House that the revised estimate for the current year
does not provide a basis for comparison when considering the estimate for next year,
because the estimate for the current year covers only 71/2 months while the provision in
the budget for next year covers a full year.
REVENUE
26. The total receipts from customs have been placed at Rs. 81.75 crores. This
provides for a full year’s revenue from the enhanced duty on exports of cotton cloth and
yarn imposed in the current year’s budget. The effect on our revenue of the restriction
on imports so as to conserve foreign exchange has been taken into account as also the
restriction on the exports of raw cotton. Central excises are expected to bring in Rs. 34
crores and receipts from income-tax which include Rs. 12 crores on account of Excess
Profits Tax and Rs. 17 crores on account of the Business Profit Tax, have been placed at
Rs. 130 crores. The divisible pool of income-tax is estimated at Rs. 80.24 crores of
which the Centre will retain Rs. 42.37 crores leaving Rs. 37.87 crores as the Provincial
share. The profits from Currency and Mint, after allowing for the share of Pakistan
under the arrangement for the management of the currency of both the Dominions by
the Reserve Bank up to the 30th September 1948, are estimated at Rs. 9.4 crores.
11

The revenue of the Posts and Telegraphs Department is expected to amount to
Rs. 26.2 crores and working expenses and interest to Rs. 25.82 crores leaving a small
surplus of Rs. 38 lakhs. In the current year, the surplus will be shared between general
revenues and the Department in the ratio of three to one while next year only half the
surplus will accrue outright to general revenues. The Department will get a rebate of
interest on its share of the accumulated profits in the past which at the end of the budget
year are expected to amount to about Rs. 8 crores.
In my estimate of receipt for 1948-49 no credit has been taken for any contribution
from the railway surplus. The position with reference to this matter was explained by
the Hon’ble Minister for Transport in his Budget Speech the other day.
EXPENDITURE
27. The total expenditure for next year is estimated at Rs. 257. 37 crores of
which Defence Services will account for Rs. 121.08 crores and Civil expenditure for
Rs. 136.29 crores. Following the customary procedure, I shall first deal with the Defence
estimates.
28. Defence Services. - The reconstitution of the Armed Forces of the undivided
Government of India into separate forces for the two dominions is now virtually complete.
It was envisaged at an earlier stage that the re-organisation of the Armed Forces would
be largely completed in the financial year 1948-49. With the alteration in the role of the
“ Armed Forces as a result of the partition a redistribution of the available financial
resources between the three services to allow for a more balanced development was
contemplated. Unfortunately, however, the recrudescence of communal disturbances
and the necessity in present circumstances of having to retain substantial forces till
normal conditions return have made it impossible to undertake the long term planning
of the Armed Forces so as to keep the expenditure on them at a level appropriate to the
financial resources of the country.
29. As the House is already aware, the process of demobilisation of the Armed
Forces was arrested by the partition of the country in order to facilitate the division of
the forces between the two dominions and to enable them independently to determine
the size and composition of their respective Armed Forces. In the altered strategic
situation following the partition and also in view of the recent disturbances in the country,
it has not been possible to resume demobilisation in the Armed Forces of the Indian
Dominion. The future strength and composition of these forces still remain to be decided
and it may be some time before a decision is taken. Meanwhile, the Army is expected to
be maintained at its present level.
30. Certain decisions for the expansion of the Naval and Air Forces have been
taken and a delegation was sent to the United Kingdom last November to discuss with
the British Government the question of acquiring certain Naval vessels and aircraft and
the provision of training and other facilities for officers and men of the Indian Forces.
These discussions were successfully completed and arrangements have been made for
12

the acquisition of certain assets and for the training of Indian personnel. Honourable
Members are aware of the decision by Government to strengthen the Navy with new
types of ships, notably a cruiser and three destroyers. A party of officers and men of the
Royal Indian Navy has already been despatched to the United Kingdom to undergo the
necessary specialised training in order to ensure that these ships are manned as far as
possible by Indian nationals. The Royal Indian Air Force is also being expanded.
31. The budget estimate for Defence Services for 1948-49 is, as I have
mentioned, Rs. 121.08 crores. This is exclusive of expenditure of a capital nature
amounting to Rs. 14. 99 crores to be incurred on the acquisition of land, the construction
of training institutions, the provision of accommodation for personnel, the acquisition
of new naval vessels, aircraft and connected equipment for the expansion of the Navy
and the Air Forces which I have mentioned earlier. Provision for this expenditure has
been included in the Capital Budget. As the House is aware, this practice of providing
for capital expenditure outside the revenue account was introduced during the last War,
and was discontinued only in 1947-48. I trust the House will agree with me that in the
present abnormal conditions the decision to charge to capital the expenditure on the
acquisition of permanent assets is unobjectionable.
32. The partition of the country placed heavy responsibilities on the Armed
Forces of this Dominion when they were in the process of reconstitution both in the
matter of maintenance of law and order and in assisting the Civil authorities in the
evacuation and relief of the minorities in the Punjab. A Military Evacuation Organisation
was set up during September 1947 with its headquarters at Amritsar and an advance
headquarter at Lahore and this organisation succeeded in evacuating over 4 million
non-Muslims from Western Pakistan and about 5 million Muslims from India within a
period of 3 months. This stupendous task had to be performed under the most trying
conditions and the troops which took part in it have responded most magnificently to
the call. While the energy and resources of the army were mobilised for this humanitarian
work further calls were made on them for the defence of Kashmir. The fighting in
Kashmir is being carried on in difficult terrain and severe climatic conditions. I am sure
the House will join me in paying a tribute to the Army and the Royal Indian Air Force
for the magnificent way In which they have responded to the call made on them.
33. Civil Estimates. - Details of the estimates under individual heads are as
usual, given in the Explanatory Memorandum circulated with the Budget papers and I
do not propose to weary the House by repeating them here. I should like however to
refer briefly to the provision included in these estimates for certain special items like
the expenditure on refugees and the subsidy for food. The expenditure on the relief and
rehabilitation of refugees next year is estimated at Rs. 10. 04 crores. The expenditure
next year will be largely on relief and rehabilitation as the evacuation of refugees has
now been nearly completed, except from Sind and to some extent from the N. W. F. P.
This estimate is necessarily tentative because In the rapidly changing conditions It has
not been possible to frame a close estimate. In addition to direct relief and grants for
13

rehabilitation a comprehensive scheme for granting advances to the refugees to enable
them to settle down in various walks of life has also been drawn up. A Rehabilitation
Finance Administration to which Government will advance Rs. 10 crores is also being
set up. I hope that the facilities provided by the Industrial Finance Corporation will also
be available for the assistance of industries which have ad to be transferred to India on
account of the communal disturbances. In addition to the provision of Rs.10.04 crores
In the revenue budget a sum of Rs. 10 crores has been included in the capital budget for
the Rehabilitation Finance Administration and Rs. 5 crores for loans and advances for
rehabilitation, Including loans to Provinces for this purpose. The expenditure on food
subsidies, including the bonus to Provinces on the internal procurement of grain under
the new food policy announced recently, is estimated at Rs. 19.91 crores next year. The
estimates also include a total provision of Rs. 103/4 crores under various heads for
expenditure upon development schemes and resettlement.
34. The House would doubtless wish to know if in framing the budget for next
year any allowance has been made for the implementation of the recommendations of
the Economy Committee the appointment of which under the Chairmanship of
Shri Kasturbhai Lalbhai was announced by me. The House will realise that it is obviously
impossible to forecast the directions In which the Committee may suggest economies
and the total amount that could be expected to he saved. I have however made a lump
cut of Rs. 21 crores under the various heads of civil expenditure in order to ensure that
some economy is effected pending the report of the Committee. If the Committee’s
report suggests economies on a large scale I propose to take steps during the course of
the year to see that they are realised. I wish to make it clear however that this lump cut
is mainly in the nature of a token and should not be taken as giving any indication of the
size of the economy which I consider could be effected. This must necessarily depend
on the considered judgement of the Committee after they have examined the various
departmental authorities and I do not wish in any way to anticipate their findings.
35. Of the total expenditure of Rs. 136.29 crores provided in the budget for
next year Rs. 29.95 crores are accounted for by the expenditure on refugees and the
payment of subsidies and bonus for foodgrains, leaving Rs. 106.34 crores for normal
expenditure. This includes Rs. 8.98 crores for tax collection, Rs. 43.86 crores for
obligatory expenditure on payment of interests and pensions and provision for debt
redemption, Rs. 3.15 crores for Planning and Resettlement, Rs. 2.2 crores for expenditure
on the Mints and the Nasik Press, Rs. 2.95 crores for grants-in-aid to Provincial
Governments and Rs. 20.93 crores for expenditure in the nation building sphere such as
Education. Medical, Public Health, Broadcasting, Aviation and the conduct of scientific
surveys and institutions in which the Central Government supplement the work of the
Provincial Governments and provide valuable technical assistance and research. The
balance of Rs. 24.27 crores represents the provision for ordinary administration, Civil
Works, etc., and this constitutes only 18 per cent, of the total civil expenditure. In
addition to Rs. 20.93 crores in the nation building sphere mentioned above, provision
14

has been made in the capital budget for a grant of Rs. 30 crores to Provincial Governments
for development and Rs. 34 crores for loans.
36. On the basis of the estimates of revenue and expenditure that I have so far
explained, the anticipated deficit in the Budget for 1948-49 is Rs. 26.85 crores. In a
later part of my speech I shall revert to the question of how I propose to deal with this
deficit.
POST-WAR PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
37. When I addressed this House last November I mentioned that the question
of re-examining the development schemes of the Provincial Governments with reference
to the reduced resources likely to be available to the Centre for financing development
and the changes resulting from the partition will be taken up. I have since had this
further examined and it has been decided that so far as the Centre is concerned there
should be no reduction in the extent of assistance promised by it to the Provinces when
the Provinces were asked to draw up their plans for development. The House will
remember that the Provinces were informed in 1945 that they could draw up their plans
of Post-war development on the assumption that in the five years beginning with 194748 they could expect assistance by way of grants of the order of Rs. 250 crores. This
amount was provisionally distributed among the Provinces in the ratio of their population.
But some special weightage was given to the backward provinces of Assam, the N.W.F.P.
and Orissa and to Bengal, which with Assam, had been affected by the impact of war in
the north-east frontier. With this weightage the Centre’s promised contribution in five
years rose to Rs. 273.88 crores. The Provinces were given advance grants to cover the
expenditure incurred by them on development schemes in 1945-46 and 1946-47 to be
taken against their share of the grant for the five year period. The progress of expenditure
on the development schemes has been somewhat slower than anticipated mainly due to
the shortage of material and manpower and the time taken to formulate detailed schemes.
In the current year a provision of Rs. 20.39 crores was included in the budget for the
period 15th August 1947 to 31st March 1948 but it is unlikely that the whole of it will be
spent. After allowing for the expenditure incurred up to the partition and for the areas
now in Pakistan and reallocating the balance to the Provinces in the Indian Dominion
the outstanding balance of the assistance from Centre to the Provinces at the end of the
current year, on approximately the same scale as was promised by the then Government
of India In 1945, is estimated roughly at between Rs. 170 crores and Rs. 180 crores I
have carefully considered whether in the altered circumstances the Centre should reduce
its assistance to the Provinces but I have come to the conclusion that in the larger
interests of the development of the country as a whole it would be unwise to do so,
particularly as the Provinces have framed their plans on the assumption that the promised
assistance would be forthcoming. In reaching this decision I have been influenced by
the fact that in actual practice the grants are likely to be spread over a somewhat longer
period than the four years that remain out of the original five years period fixed for this
assistance. This, to some extent, will relieve the strain on the resources of the Centre.
15

But it is being made clear to the Provinces that in future the grants from the Centre up
to the maximum agreed to will be contingent on the Provinces spending from their own
resources at least an equal amount and that the whole scheme of assistance would be
subject to readjustment if in the new constitution there is any substantial transfer of
resources from the Centre to the units. I trust that with this assurance the Provinces will
now be in a position to go ahead with their schemes of development and that they will
conserve and exploit all the available resources for this purpose. The budget for the
next year includes a provision of Rs. 30 crores for grants to Provinces for development
and Rs. 34 crores for loans to them.
38. For Central schemes of development including resettlement a provision of
Rs. 103/4 crores has been made in the revenue budget and Rs. 251/2 crores in the capital
budget. Details of the provision are given in the Explanatory Memorandum circulated
with the Budget papers and I do not propose to dilate at length on the individual schemes
for which provision has been included in the budget. But they cover a very wide field
and among the important schemes I would mention the expansion of the Forest Research
Institute, DehraDun, the development of the valuable forests in the Andamans, the
preliminary work on the Kosi, Sone Valley, Ghandak and Assam Valley projects, all of
which form part of the large scale schemes of river development, the reorganisation of
the Central Waterways Navigation and Irrigation Research Stations, the setting up of a
Tractor Testing Station, the establishment of a Central Agricultural College, the expansion
of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, the loan of Rs. 2 crores to the Damodar
Valley Corporation and the investment of Rs. 1 crore in the Industrial Finance
Corporation. In addition to provision for expenditure on the individual schemes just
mentioned the budget also provides for an expenditure of over Rs. 2 crores for buildings
for development schemes, Rs. 61/4 crores for the construction and development of
National Highways, 61/2 crores for the Fertiliser Factory under construction at Sindri,
Rs. 4 crores for the expansion of civil aviation and Rs. 70 lakhs for the expansion of
broadcasting facilities.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
39. Before I pass on to deal with the ways and means position I shall give the
House a brief account of the provision included in the budget for normal capital
expenditure. The revised estimate for this year includes a provision of Rs. 261/2 crores
of which the Railways account for Rs. 163/4 crores, Posts and Telegraphs for Rs. 21/2
crores and schemes of State Trading for Rs. 43/4 crores. For next year the provision
amounts to Rs. 76 crores of which Rs. 241/2 crores are for Railways, Rs. 31/4 crores for
Posts and Telegraphs, Rs. 15 crores for Defence to cover expenditure on the purchase
of naval vessels aircraft and spares for the expansion of the Navy and Air Forces, the
acquisition of land and the construction of accommodation for Defence Services
personnel, Rs. 31/4 crores on the provision of additional accommodation in New Delhi,
Rs. 23/4 crores for administrative buildings and communications costing over a lakh of
rupees, the cost of which is now met from capital and Rs. 27 crores for the building-up
16

of the central reserve of 6 lakhs tons of foodgrains in accordance with the recently
announced food policy of Government. The total provision in the Capital Budget for
normal requirements and for financing the development schemes both of the Centre
and the Provinces comes to the impressive figure of Rs. 70 crores this year and Rs. 1651/
crores next year.
2
WAYS AND MEANS
40. I now turn to a brief consideration of the ways and means position. During
this year owing to the uncertain political conditions in the earlier months, the partition
of the country and the widespread communal disturbances in certain parts of the country
it was not possible to borrow from the market the substantial amount which it was
originally planned. Next year in addition to the interest-free prize bonds, with an
outstanding of a little over Rs. 5 crores, which mature in January 1949, Government
have the option of repaying the outstanding balance of the 23/4 per cent Loan 1948-52
and the 4 percent Loan 1948-53. A decision on the exercise of this option will be taken
in the course of the year with reference to the conditions then prevailing. The market
borrowing next year have been taken at Rs. 150 crores but if circumstances are propitious
the scale of borrowing will be stepped up. I would in this connection reiterate the appeal
I made on the floor of this House last November for the utmost co-operation from the
public in the borrowing operations of the Government. Apart from the need which still
remains for withdrawing surplus purchasing power from the hands of the community as
a measure of anti-inflation, the requirement of funds for financing the large scale plans
of development which the Government have in view and for assistance to the Provinces
for Implementing their schemes Is as great as ever and unless the public co-operate
whole-heartedly with the Government by lending their savings it will be impossible to
undertake all the schemes of development, necessary for raising the standard of life of
our people.
41. I shall now pass on to the consideration of the all-important problem of
how to deal with the deficit of Rs. 26.85 crores.
42. I just mentioned a deficit of Rs. 26.85 crores. This is exclusive of any
contribution from the railway surplus. As Honourable Members are aware, it has now
been decided that out of the railway surplus a contribution of Rs.4.5 crores should be
made to general revenues during the next year. The estimated deficit is therefore reduced
to Rs. 22.35 crores.
RELIEFS IN TAXATION
43. The House will remember that in my Budget Speech last November I
referred to the widespread criticism that the level of taxation in the 1947-48 Budget had
seriously affected the incentive for saving and investment and I undertook to make a
careful examination of the consequences of our taxation policy before I presented the
annual Budget. Since then I have given very anxious thought to the question and I have
reached the conclusion that there is a considerable measure of justification in that
17

criticism. As I have emphasised elsewhere, the paramount need in present conditions is
to stimulate production and any fiscal or administrative measure which restricts or
curtails the expansion of industry will stunt our development and add to our future
difficulties. While industry should be called upon to pay its just contribution to the
common exchequer, the burden placed upon it must be such as to allow business to
expand. At the same time the aim of our policy should be to secure that, while the level
of taxation is reasonably high so that the wealthier sections of the community are placed
under an equitable contribution for the common needs of the State, a genuine margin is
left for savings which would flow back into investment and thereby add to the productive
wealth of the community, which the State itself could subsequently tap. It is also necessary
so to adjust our taxation as to provide a real incentive to the ploughing back of profits
into fresh business. In making my proposals in the field of direct taxation, I have kept
these considerations prominently in mind.
44. I shall pass on to deal first with the various measures of relief which I
propose to give.
My first proposal is with reference to the Business Profits Tax. This measure
gave room for a good deal of controversy when it was introduced for the first time in the
budget for 1947-48. The sudden withdrawal of the Excess Profits Tax- gave this tax a
considerable measure of justification. During the discussions on the floor of the House
the then Finance Member stated that this tax would be in operation for one year, leaving
it to his successor to decide whether it should be continued or not. In view of the criticism
levelled against this measure, both inside this House and outside, I have given a good
deal of thought to this matter. I have come to the conclusion that, in the present
circumstances, there is no justification for the complete withdrawal of this tax. Hon’ble
Members might know that in the United Kingdom a tax of this kind was introduced
some time back as a National Defence Contribution. The tax is retained though its
nomenclature has been subsequently changed to profits Tax. The need for additional
funds for reconstruction and especially for the rehabilitation of refugees would justify
the continuance of this measure in India for some time. I have, therefore, decided to
retain this source of revenue but to reduce the burden of this tax considerably. The
abatement allowed at present is Rs. 1 lakh or 6 per cent of the capital employed, whichever
is larger. The rate of the tax is 162/3 per cent. I propose that the abatement should be Rs.
2 lakhs or 6 per cent of the capital employed, whichever is larger, and that the rate of the
tax should be reduced to 10 per cent. I hope this reduction will be welcomed by the
business community. The not result of this proposal will be a gross loss of Rs. 2 crores.
Rs. 1 crore of this loss will, however, be recovered by the increase in income-tax receipts
and the net result will therefore be a loss of Rs. 1 crore.
My second proposal Is to reduce the existing rate of super-tax. The House will
remember that last year the limit of Income at which the maximum rate of 101/2 annas is
attracted was reduced in the case of earned income from Rs. 5 lakhs to Rs. 11/2 lakhs
and in the case of unearned Income from Rs. 31/2 lakhs to Rs. 1,20,000. The effect of
18

this was to take away from any person with an income of Rs. 1,20,000 nearly the whole
of the income beyond this amount. This hardly left any Inventive to save and I have no
doubt myself that such severe taxation at this level would seriously hamper the growth
of savings and retard our industrial development. I have accordingly raised the limit at
which the maximum rate of tax will be attracted to Rs. 31/2 lakhs for both earned and
unearned income. I trust the House will agree with me that this measure of relief is
justified. I have also rearranged the rate of the tax within the slabs and the rates as they
now stand seem to me to fulfil the double purpose of keeping the level of taxation
sufficiently high while leaving at the same time a margin for saving. The changes in
super-tax are estimated to cost Rs. 1 crores.
In the budget for 1946-47 a complicated system of levying super-tax at steeply
graded rates on dividends above a datum line was introduced and last year these rates
were further stiffened. The object of this was to deter the distribution of large dividends
and secure the ploughing back of profits into business. In actual practice very little
revenue was collected from this source and the purpose with which it was introduced
does not appear to have been realised. I feel that something more positive is required to
induce Industrialists to return more of their profits into investment than taxing those
who distribute large dividends. My proposal to secure this end is to reduce the tax on
the undistributed profits of companies by one anna. The cost of this concession is
estimated at Rs. 2 crores. The effect of my proposal will be that on distributed profits
the present rate of 5 annas will remain while the tax on undistributed profits will be at
the rate of 4 annas. I trust that this concession will produce better results than the
present complicated system.
My next proposal is to reduce the income-tax on companies with an income of
Rs. 25000 and below to half the usual rates. Among the dangers to be avoided in the
rapid industrialisation of this country is the one of concentrating too many businesses
in the hands of large companies and I feel that every encouragement should be given to
the growth of smaller companies. This will broadbase our economy and will also be in
line with our general pattern of industrial development with its constant emphasis on
the development of cottage industries and a fair distribution of industry over the various
Provinces. My contribution towards such a development is to allow this concession in
favour of small companies with moderate incomes. The loss of revenue from this is
estimated at Rs. 12 lakhs.
There is a widespread feeling that with the heavy taxation to which incomes are
now subject there is very little scope left for assistance by the public to deserving
institutions and charities. I have received a number of representations on this subject
and after careful consideration of the matter I feel that a measure of relief on contributions
made to recognised institutions and charities would be justified. In this country there is
a far too general a tendency for charitable and other institutions to look to the State for
assistance and not to the public. To the extent to which there is a larger flow of private
benefaction to such institutions, the burden on the State for supporting them will be
19

reduced. I accordingly propose that donations to approved institutions and charities
should be exempted from taxation so long as they do not exceed 5 per cent. of the net
taxable income in the case of companies and 10 per cent. in the case of individuals,
subject to a maximum of Rs. 21 lakhs in both cases - I trust the House will welcome this
concession and I hope it will encourage our industrialists and the public to subscribe
more generously to deserving institutions and purposes. It is my intention to have a list
of approved institutions and bodies drawn up in consultation with the Provincial
Governments. It is difficult to estimate the loss of revenue involved in this concession
and I have taken a rough figure of Rs. 75 lakhs.
I also propose to give a further measure of relief, in regard to the payment of
municipal taxes on house property. I have felt that the absence of such an exemption is
an anomaly in our tax system and that there is a justifiable claim for relief here. I
accordingly propose to exempt these payments from taxation. The cost of this concession
is estimated at Rs. 7 5 lakhs.
45. Before I pass on to deal with reliefs in indirect taxation, I should like to
mention briefly a point in which it seems necessary to readjust our Corporation Tax.
Honourable Members are aware that under the law as it stands we are entitled to recover
super-tax on dividends paid by companies incorporated outside this country to their
shareholders abroad in respect of their Indian business. For this purpose it is necessary
to ascertain from the companies particulars about their shareholders abroad and the
dividends distributed to them. This information is rarely available in full with the result
that very little of the tax due is collected. It is necessary that some effective arrangement
should be made to protect our revenue against this leakage and I think that this can best
be done by raising the general rate of Corporation Tax and giving an appropriate rebate
on their income to those companies which declare and pay their dividends in India. I
accordingly propose that the rate of Corporation Tax be raised from 2 annas to 3 annas
and a rebate of one anna allowed to the companies which declare and distribute their
dividends in India. The effect of this proposal will be that companies in India will pay
the present rate of Corporation Tax at 2 annas while foreign companies having business
in India will have to pay a corporation Tax of 3 annas on their profits earned in this
country. This change is expected to bring an additional revenue of Rs. 2 crores.
46. I may now summarise the net effect of the reliefs in income-tax and the
proposed change in the Corporation Tax. The various concessions I have just detailed
will result in a loss in revenue of Rs. 6.62 crores, of which the Provincial share will
amount to Rs. 2.41 crores. This will, however, be partly set off by the additional revenue
of Rs. 2 crores from the change in the Corporation Tax and Rs. 1 crore from the ordinary
collection of tax resulting from the reduction in the Business Profits Tax, of which the
Provincial share will amount to Rs. 45 lakhs. The net effect of my proposals on the
Centre is a reduction of Rs. 1.66 crores.
47.

I shall now turn to the reliefs in the field of indirect taxation.
20

During the debate on the interim Budget there was some criticism about the
increase in the export duty on cloth and I promised to consider the suggestion that the
duty should be converted into an ad valorem duty. I have received a number of
representations that the present specific duty is pressing too heavily on handloom cloth
and on certain categories of mill-made cloth. The duty of annas a pound on cotton yarn
has also proved burdensome and on a careful review of the matter in all aspects I have
decided to convert the export duty into an ad valorem duty of 25 per cent, to exempt
handloom cloth from the duty and to withdraw the duty on exports of cotton yarn.
These con7 cessions will involve a loss of revenue of Rs. 4.5 crores.
I also propose to withdraw the present excise duty on betelnuts. The administration
of this excise has always been difficult and it has been a prolific source of complaint
from the area-growing Provinces. I trust the House would welcome this concession
which I hope will mean a cheapening of this article to the poor man. Loss of revenue
involved is Rs. 30 lakhs.
48. The net effect of all the reliefs mentioned so far and the changes in incometax is a reduction in revenue of Rs. 6.46 crores, raising the prospective deficit to Rs.28.81
crores.
NEW AND ADDITIONAL TAXES
49. In an earlier part of this speech I expressed the view that in the present
inflationary conditions it is necessary to reduce, as far as possible, the gap between
revenue and expenditure and if it is at all possible to have a surplus budget. I am sure
the House will agree with me that the prospective deficit is too large to be left uncovered
and that in a transitional time like this we should take every step possible to strengthen
our revenue position. In raising additional taxation it is, in my view, necessary to secure
that as little of the burden as possible falls on the poor man.
50. Before I deal with my proposal for raising additional revenue I shall briefly
digress to mention a change in accounting which will reduce the prospective deficit by
Rs. 10 crores. Advance payments of income-tax under Section 18-A of the Income Tax
Act are not credited as revenue but held in deposit till the complicated process of
assessing the tax completed. These advance payments of tax are not really refundable
deposits and there is no reason why they should not be credited to revenue straightaway.
I propose to introduce this change with effect from next year. But the change will be
made in stages so that the budgetary position is not violently disturbed. The advance
payments will be credited to a separate minor head within the major head and transferred
to the final heads on completion of the assessments. The change in procedure will be
given effect to next year in respect of advance payments of Corporation Tax and will be
extended to advance payments of income-tax in subsequent years. I need hardly mention
that this change in procedure will not in any way affect the provincial share of incometax. The result of this change will be to divert to revenue next year Rs. 10 crores which
would have otherwise been credited as a deposit. This will reduce the deficit to Rs.
18.81 crores.
21

51. I shall now address myself to the problem of covering this deficit by new
taxes. The House will appreciate that with the existing shortage in the foreign exchange
resources of the country and the need to conserve them as far as possible to meet our
heavy commitments in respect of our food purchases, it is not possible to expect any
substantial relief from the expansion of customs revenue from import duties, although
the country could absorb all the imports likely to flow in if the restrictions on imports
are relaxed. For a considerable time we shall have to rely on Central Excises and, to
some extent, on the yield of export duties. In framing my taxation proposals I have
turned as much as possible to the field of export duties, which do not involve any
additional burden on our people, and to such of the excises as do not affect the poorer
classes.
My first proposal is to levy an export duty of Rs. 80 per ton on oilseeds and Rs.
200 per ton on vegetable oils. There is a wide disparity between the internal prices of
these commodities and their export prices and I am satisfied that the imposition of this
duty will not affect our export market. The yield from this duty is estimated at Rs. 2.5
crores.
My next proposal is to levy an export duty of Rs. 20 per ton on Manganese to
yield Rs. 80 lakhs.
I propose to make only two minor changes in the import duties. The duty on
motor cars will be raised from 45 per cent to 50 per cent, with a preference of 71/2 per
cent in favour of the United Kingdom - The yield from this increase is estimated at
Rs. 50 lakhs. The import duty on cigars, cigarettes and manufactured tobacco will also
be slightly raised following the changes in the excise duty, to which I shall presently
refer. The increase in revenue from this change is estimated at Rs. 12 lakhs.
In the field of Central Excises my main proposals concern Tobacco. It is only in
recent years that the Tobacco excise has been developed and the system of taxation
could, in my opinion, be rationalised so as to increase the revenue from this source. But
this will take some time. Meanwhile, I propose to levy an excise duty on cigarettes
amounting to roughly 25 per cent on the ex-factory prices. I estimated the yield from
this change at Rs. 7 crores. Simultaneously the duty on certain categories of
unmanufactured tobacco will be raised from 9 annas per lb. to 12 annas per lb. in some
cases and 3 annas per lb. to 4 annas per lb. in others in order to secure that there is no
diversion from the consumption of cigarettes of the cheaper varieties. This increase is
estimated to yield Rs. 2 crores.
The excise duty on Tea will be raised from 2 annas per lb. to 4 annas per lb. to
bring it to the same level as the export duty. The additional revenue from this increase
is estimated at Rs. 1. 8 crores.
The duty on Coffee will be similarly raised to 4 annas per lb. to yield Rs. 30
lakhs.
22

The duty on Vegetable Product will be raised by 50 per cent. to Rs. 7-8-0 per cwt.
to yield Rs.40 lakhs.
The duty on Tyres will also be raised by 50 per cent. The additional revenue is
estimated at Rs. 40 lakhs.
The House will remember that in the budget for 1946-47 the excise duty on
Matches was reduced from Rs. 2-8-0 per gross to Rs. 1-12-0 per gross for boxes
containing between 40 and 50 matches. In actual practice this reduction has not been
passed on to the consumer and I propose that this should be withdrawn and the minimum
duty fixed at Rs. 2-8-0 per gross on all boxes containing up to 50 matches. The additional
revenue from this will amount to Rs. 150 lakhs.
1 also propose to make two minor changes in the Postal and Telephone rates. The
registration fee will be raised from 3 to 4 annas while the surcharge on trunk telephone
calls will be raised from 40 to 60 per cent and amalgamated with the basic rate. These
changes, which will be introduced by executive orders will bring in an additional revenue
of Rs. 40 lakhs.
NET RESULT OF PROPOSALS
52. I may now summarise the net effect of all the proposals that I have made.
The reliefs and the changes that I have proposed in income-tax, super-tax and Corporation
Tax will result in a loss of Rs. 1.66 crores. The abolition of the export duty on handloom
cloth and yarn and the reduction of the export duty on mill-made cloth will mean a loss
of Rs. 4.5 crores. The abolition of the excise duty on betelnuts will cost Rs. 30 lakhs.
The total loss to revenue on account of relief and readjustments of these taxes will be
Rs. 6.46 crores. On the basis of this loss the original deficit of Rs. 22.35 crores will be
increased to Rs. 28. 81 crores. This deficit will again be reduced to Rs. 18.81 crores by
taking the advance payments of Corporation Tax next year direct to revenue. With
regard to the additional taxes, the proposed export duties will bring in Rs. 3.3 crores.
The increase in the import duties will bring in Rs. 62 lakhs. The increase in excises will
bring in Rs. 13.4 crores. The changes made in the Postal and Telephone charges will
bring in Rs. 40 lakhs. The total net revenue resulting from these new taxes and the
enhancements of certain existing taxes will thus bring in an additional revenue of Rs.
17.72 crores. The final deficit for the year will therefore stand at Rs. 1.09 crores. In the
present circumstances, I feel fully justified in leaving this small deficit uncovered. In
considering this deficit the House must remember that the estimates do not include any
credit on account of the interest due from Pakistan on its partition debt which but for
the moratorium, would be available to the credit of our revenues. Though it is not
possible to know accurately at present the amount of the interest due from Pakistan, it
may be assumed on a very rough calculation that it would be of the order of Rs. 9
crores. If this amount which is legitimately due to us and the payment of which is only
postponed, was available to me in the next year, the deficit would really be converted
into a substantial surplus.
23

DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES
53. Much has been said in the past on the floor of this House and elsewhere
regarding the maintenance of a proper balance between direct and indirect taxes in our
tax structure. The House will appreciate that this is not a matter which could be regulated
by any set principles and that, in the ultimate analysis it is merely a question of arranging
the taxation to the best advantage of the community and with reference to the economic
conditions of each country. Thus, while in an industrially advanced country it may be
possible to raise a substantial revenue by direct taxation it will obviously be unwise to
pitch the direct taxes too high in a country in the process of development as the inevitable
effect of high direct taxation is to retard the formation of capital without which industrial
development is not possible. Similarly when the main consideration is to curtail
consumption, as during a period of shortage of goods and inflation, it may be necessary
to raise the level of indirect taxation to secure a reduction in consumption. There is also
a common fallacy that the larger the amount of indirect taxation the heavier the burden
on the ordinary man. While it is of course true that over a considerable field consumption
taxes reach a wider section of the population than direct taxation, consumption taxes on
such luxuries as motor cars, the costlier varieties of tobacco and cigarettes, duties on
wines and spirits, export duties which do not affect the internal consumer, all of which
go to swell the total of indirect taxation do not touch the life of the ordinary man. In this
connection I am sure the House will be interested to know the pattern of our tax structure.
In 1937-38 out of a total revenue of Rs. 75.8 crores direct taxation accounted for only
21 per cent while the bulk of the revenue came from indirect taxation. This proportion
has naturally varied during the war years when there was a steep rise in direct taxation
due to the large increase in income-tax and the levy of the Excess Profits Tax. In the
budget for next year which I am now presenting to this House the proportion of direct to
indirect taxation will be about equal. It would be interesting to compare our position in
this respect with the United Kingdom. In a highly industrialised country like the United
Kingdom, the scope for raising large revenues from direct taxation is greater. The United
Kingdom budget for 1947-48 discloses that in that country the percentage of direct
taxes to the total tax revenue is only 52. This compares very favourably with our tax
structure in which, with a comparatively poor industrial economy, we collect about 51
per cent. of our taxes from direct taxes. Another interesting feature of our economy is
that, as compared with 1937-38, the direct taxes would have increased eight and half
times in 1948-49 while the indirect taxes would have increased only by a little over
twice. Considering the relatively undeveloped state of our country, I do not think that
any one could say that the burden of direct taxation in this country is unduly light or
that there has been any shifting of the burden on the shoulders of the ordinary man.
FUTURE PROSPECTS
54. On the estimates as they finally emerge, the total revenue next year will
stand at Rs. 256.28 crores and the expenditure at Rs.257.37 crores leaving an uncovered
deficit of Rs.1.09 crores. I must, however, warn the House that this cannot by any
means be regarded as the normal figure of revenue and expenditure for the subsequent
24

years. The estimated income-tax receipts for 1948-49 include collections relating to the
Excess Profits Tax which will practically disappear in the subsequent years. The Business
Profits Tax in subsequent years will also be less and other factors being equal, the net
proceeds of income-tax accruing to the Central Government for 1949-50 will be
approximately Rs. 20 crores less than the corresponding receipts for 1948-49. The total
revenue for 1949-50 will therefore be at least Rs. 20 crores less than in 1948-49. As
against this, it should be borne in mind that certain items of expenditure appearing in
the budget for 1948-49 may reasonably by expected to show a considerable decrease.
The expenditure provided for next year under relief and rehabilitation and food subsidies
amounts to Rs. 29.95 crores. It may reasonably be anticipated that the expenditure
under these two items will go down considerably during the subsequent years. If normal
political conditions are restored, a reduction in the defence expenditure may also be
anticipated. Taking all the factors into consideration, it is not unreasonable to hope for
a balanced budget in the future. The House will realise that in the transitional phase
through which we are passing, it is difficult to make any precise estimate of our financial
position for the next two or three years. On any reasonable view of the situation, I feel
it is the path of prudence to strengthen our revenue position and keep down our
expenditure as much as possible. As a precautionary measure, in tapping new sources
of revenue I have decided to re-introduce in the current session the Estate Duty Bill.
Even though the proceeds of this duty will go to the benefit of the Provinces, any
augmentation of the revenues of the Provinces would, to some extent, reduce the strain
on Central finances. Apart from this, it is possible under the proposed measure to levy
surcharges for purely Central purposes.
55. Although I have not been able to present a balanced or a surplus budget,
much as I wish to, the size of the deficit next year which I propose to leave uncovered
is very small in relation to the total expenditure. It may be considered an index of the
efforts that we are making to close the era of war-time deficits and bridge the gap
between revenue and expenditure. In my interim Budget I ventured to express the view
that the financial position of the country was intrinsically sound and that we were not
living beyond our means or heading towards bankruptcy. The Budget that I am now
presenting fully supports this view. While it will be folly to ignore the difficulties ahead,
I feel that we can face the future in a spirit of sober confidence.
PUBLIC DEBT
56. The debt position of a country is a sure index of its financial strength and
here again I think our position is inherently sound. At the end of the current year, the
total outstanding public debt is expected to stand at Rs. 1,795 crores and to rise by a
further Rs. 56 crores during next year to Rs. 1,851 crores. The total of the interest
bearing obligations is estimated at Rs. 2,182 crores at the end of this year and Rs. 2,231
crores at the end of the budget year. Against these obligations we expect to have at the
end of this year roughly Rs. 1,161 crores and at the end of next year Rs. 1,237 crores by
way of interest yielding assets representing the investments in the two great commercial
25

departments of Government, namely, the Railways and Posts and Telegraphs, outstanding
amounts due to us from the Provincial Governments, Indian States, Burma and others,
and the probable debt of Pakistan to us. In addition, we shall be holding cash and other
investments on treasury account amounting to Rs. 246 crores at the end of this year and
Rs. 130 crores at the end of next year. The total interest bearing obligations not covered
by interest bearing assets and our cash and interest yielding Investments would thus
amount to no more than Rs. 775 crores at the end of the current year and Rs. 864 crores
at the end of the next year. The House will realise that these figures are to some extent
approximate and it is not possible to give precise figures until Pakistan’s share of the
obligations which she would assume direct and her debt to India have been finally
worked out. Allowances has however been made for this on the best guess that could be
made and I think the House may accept these figures as giving a broad indication of the
position.
57. The debt burden is to be judged primarily by the size of the dead-weight
debt. The amount of dead-weight debt which I estimate at Rs. 864 crores is indeed very
small when compared with the resources of the country and the national income. The
debt position may be compared with the national income for assessing whether the debt
is one which the country can afford to carry. For this purpose, we may take the whole of
the interest bearing obligation of the Government of India which are expected to stand
at Rs. 2,231 crores at the end of next year Unfortunately, we have no accurate data
regarding the national income of our country. Various estimates have been made from
time to time, but none of them has been made on a really accurate and scientific basis
and I do not think we shall be far wrong if we assume that our national income is of the
order of 4,500 crores of rupees. Our public debt is less than half of our national income.
It is interesting to compare our position with that of more advanced countries like the
United Kingdom and the United States. The national debt in the United States is more
than 11/2 times its national income and the national debt of the United Kingdom is
nearly three times its national income. The burden of the debt may also be assessed in
another manner by studying the interest charges in relation to the annual revenue. For
the year 1948-49 our gross payment of interest charges will amount to Rs. 61.82 crores.
From our Commercial Departments like Railways, Posts and Telegraphs, etc., and by
way of interest receipts from Provincial Governments and other sources we get Rs.
25.66 crores. The net interest payment therefore is Rs. 36.16 crores. From this must
again be deducted the interest due to us from Pakistan which I have estimated at
approximately 9 crores of rupees. Our net interest burden is therefore about Rs. 27
crores. The anticipated revenue is Rs. 256.28 crores. Our net interest payment therefore
represents only about 101 per cent of our revenue. The inference that may legitimately
be drawn from these figures is that we could carry even a larger volume of debt and that
there is still a large source available here for financing the development of the country.
The savings of the community could be mobilised on a very much larger scale for
financing productive schemes of development. I appealed earlier in my speech for public
co-operation in the borrowing programme of Government. The picture of our financial
26

position which I have unfolded before this House will, I hope, have a reassuring effect
on the public and instil a spirit of confidence all round.
CONCLUSION
58. Mr. Speaker, I have completed my survey of the economic condition of our
country, my estimate of our income and expenditure and my proposals for the coming
year. I must apologise to the House for the length of my statement. In the first annual
Budget, I thought it my duty to give the House a fairly full picture of our financial
position. In my interim Budget I struck a note of subdued optimism and ventured to
express my opinion that our financial position was intrinsically sound. A more detailed
examination over a longer period has confirmed that opinion. In spite of all the trials to
which our infant State has been subjected, we have the solid foundations on which we
can confidently build the superstructure of our economic and social edifice. The pattern
of that structure is entirely in our hands to draw. While fighting the uphill battle of
freedom we dreamt the dream of an India, free from want and insecurity, a land in
which our people would have In abundance the material and moral contents of a good
life. But then our hands were tied and so we merely made plans which would improve
our agriculture and industrialise our country, and thus provide a higher standard of
living to our masses. From August 15th, 1947, the chains of our bondage have been
broken and we are free to translate our dreams into reality. The plans are there but we
find that our freedom was born in an era so fluid and fast changing that any predetermined step other than the next became obsolete before it could be taken. We feel
like the pilgrim who drags his weary limbs finally to the mountain top only to find
higher peaks stretching before his eyes. It is by no means the journey’s end and the
night falls and engulfs him in darkness. And like him we are inspired to pray in the
spirit of the favourite hymn of Mahatma Gandhi - Lead Kindly Light. The next step is
enough for us if it is illuminated by the star of our ambition and fortified by the faith in
our destiny.
(FEBRUARY 28, 1948)

27

