STATEMENT OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN, MINISTER OF FINANCE ON NEW
TAXATION PROPOSALS
Sir,
The presentation of fresh taxation proposals only five mouths after I presented
the regular annual budget for 1974-75 has not been an easy decision for the Government.
It is an event of unusual significance and derives its justification from the fact that we
are faced with a difficult economic situation. A am, however, convinced that not to act
in the present situation would amount to fiscal irresponsibility, with serious
consequences for the economic health of the country. Thus the decision to come forward
with these proposals is not only an indication of the seriousness of the economic
situation. bit also a measure of the Government’s determination to grapple with it
effectively.
2.
It is self-evident that controlling inflation is today the single most important
task facing the country. The measures adopted so far by the Government to curb
inflation have had a limited impact and the upward pressure on prices has persisted.
There is a general expectation of continued price increases, which itself has constituted
an inflationary factor.
3.
The thrust of the Central Budget for 1974-75 was to restrain the growth of
Government expenditure, mobilise additional resources on a substantial scale, and to
reduce reliance on deficit financing. This was part of the overall anti-inflationary
strategy, However, judging by price trends in the last four or five months, there has
been no visible reduction in the strength of inflationary forces operating in the economy.
Over the three months April to June, 1974, the rise in the general price level. was of
the order of 7.8 per cent, yielding an average monthly increase of about 2.6 per cent,
as compared to an average monthly increase of 2,7 per cent during the three months
January to March, 1974. This continuing deterioration on the price front has been a
source of the greatest concern to Government.
4
I do not wish to dwell at length on the causes for the persistence of
inflationary pressures. I have talked about these often enough in this House. I would
venture to say that these are basically rooted in the sluggishness of agricultural
production. The recent wheat crop has not been up to original expectations. As a
result, the tendency on the part of producers to hold back supplies seems to have
strengthened. Despite a very sizable increase in procurement prices, procurement so
far has fallen short of expectations. The production of oilseeds in the rabi season has
also been inadequate, and this has strengthened bullish sentiment in the markets in
regard to vegetable oilseeds and oils. Industrial production which remained virtually
stagnant in 1973 continues to be inhibited by shortages of power.
1

5.
All these factors point to the persistence of a sizable imbalance between
aggregate demand and supply. As a result, Government have considered it necessary
to come forward with a fresh package of measures designed to reduce the imbalance.
The basic objective of the three recent Ordinances, involving temporarily restrictions
on declaration of dividends, immobilisation of 50 per cent of additional Dearness
Allowances and of increase in wages and salaries, and compulsory deposits by income
tax payers in higher income groups, is to reduce the pressure of demand and decelerate
the rate of growth of money supply. In any appraisal of these measures, we must not
lose sight of the narrow options open to the Government. In the present situation, the
only other feasible course of action would be a drastic cut in all developmental
expenditure. This would entail severe adverse effects on the future growth of the
economy.
6.
A large expansion in bank credit in recent months has led the Reserve
Bank to tighten further its credit controls. Instructions have been issued to each
commercial bank to scrutinise-the top 50 accounts in order to ensure that bank credit
is not used for excessive accumulation of inventories or diverted for non-productive
purposes. More recently, an increase of 2 per cent in the Bank rate, accompanied by
an increase in both the minimum lending rate and in deposit rates of commercial
banks, announced on July 22, 1974, will help to reduce further the incentive to
accumulate inventories with the help of bank credit; it will also facilitate mobilisation
of deposits.
7.
The measures that we have recently adopted are steps in the right direction.
Let me be clear: by themselves they cannot stabilise prices. Fundamentally, the
imbalances that now exist in our economy can be removed only through a sustained
increase in agricultural production, though this is not going to be an easy task because
of inadequate indigenous production of fertilizer and steep increases in their import
prices. We are purchasing as much fertilizer abroad as we can inspite of the formidable
nature of the import bill which is likely to be over Rs.450 crores. The ample provision
that we have made for the core sector in the annual plan for 1974-75 should also
enable us to secure a significant increase in the production of coal and steel.
Improvements in the production and transport of coal are already visible. Mainly
because of power shortages and transport difficulties, the overall outlook for industrial
production is however uncertain.
8.
Fortunately, our foreign exchange reserves have held up fairly well. This
is due mainly to borrowings from the International Monetary Fund, continuity of
external assistance, and particularly to a rapid growth in our export earnings during
1973-74. As a result we have been able to finance sizable imports of food grains
though at very considerable cost. The export outlook for 1974-75 is however not
equally encouraging. The prices of some of our export products have declined in
recent months. In addition, the high current rate of inflation constitutes a serious
threat to the maintenance of the competitiveness of our exports, which may threaten
2

the viability of our balance of payments. This only underlines the pressing need to
control our rate of inflation.
9.
Against this background, the need for further measures to reduce the
pressure of demand in our economy is self-evident. In the present inflationary
environment, it is essential to contain the size of the budgetary deficit. This we are
determined to do. However, a number of factors have upset our original calculations
and are threatening to push up the Central Government’s budgetary deficit well beyond
the original budgeted figure of Rs.126 crores. Let me mention some of these.
10. As the House is aware, Government have recently increased the issue
prices of wheat in order to scale down the burden of the food subsidy. Currently, there
is only a small element of subsidy in the procurement of indigenous wheat and coarse
grains. However, on account of unsatisfactory production and inadequate procurement
of wheat during the last rabi season, the Government is having to import, as I mentioned
earlier, sizable quantities of food grains in order to maintain the public distribution
system. As imported wheat costs much more than indigenous wheat but has to be sold
at the same price, the burden of the food subsidy will be much higher than the original
provision of Rs.100 crores.
11. The weak financial position of the railways is well known to the
Honourable MembeRs.Because of the higher burden of pay and allowances of the
staff and the disruption of traffic caused by the recent railway strike, the deficit in the
railway budget will increase substantially beyond the original provision of Rs.52 crores.
12. Additionally, we, must reckon with the fact that by reason of the continuing
increase in prices, the budgetary provision for additional dearness allowance will
have to be substantially increased. There is also likely to be some increase in expenditure
on defence because of rising costs and further improvements in the emoluments of
defence personnel.
13. On the Plan side, the continued increase in prices has led to an escalation
of project costs accompanied by a further erosion in the internal resources of some of
our public sector enterprises.
14. Taking both Plan and non-Plan outlays together, it seems clear for reasons
I have just mentioned that unless a number of remedial steps are taken, the gap between
aggregate expenditure and the total resources in sight in the current year will be very
much larger than the deficit of Rs.126 crores which was estimated when presenting
this year is budget. While expenditures have been going up sharply, the trend of
yields, from taxes at their present levels does not suggest that there will be any
substantial excess over the estimate of revenue made in the budget. It is in this context
that I have come before this House with proposals for mobilising additional resources
by way of taxation.
15.

I should like to say, however, that the potential deficit can by no means be
3

covered by fresh taxation only, and that there is clearly need to take other
complementary steps to reduce the deficit.
16. We have undertaken a comprehensive review of all Government
expenditure, in a search for possible economies. This is not an easy task because this
year’s budget was framed after eliminating many Plan schemes which were considered
postponable. Moreover, it would be a self-defeating exercise if a reduction in current
outlays were to result in key projects in the core sector being refused the funds necessary
for their early completion. To the maximum extent possible, we have to maintain the
rate of investment in such core sectors of the economy as power and fertilizeRs.At the
same time, we are seeking to effect economics not only in all non-developmental
expenditure, but also on development schemes which have a somewhat lower priority..
We are also exploring the possibilities of increasing the profitability of our public
sector enterprises and departmental undertakings. An exercise to cut expenditure
drastically is now under way. Until this has been completed and the results of other
measures taken by us are known, it would be difficult to indicate precisely what the
final position would be. In view of the acute inflationary situation prevailing we fully
intend to contain the Central Government’s budget deficit to the level indicated in this
year’s Budget and Government will take all necessary steps to this end.
17. Before I unfold my specific proposals, I would like to explain to the
House the rationale underlying these proposals. In the background of the great hardships
being endured by the common man, there is clearly no case for imposing fresh levies
on articles of mass consumption. Accordingly, in my choice of commodities for taxation,
I have avoided imposition of new taxes on the basic necessities of life. At the same
time, the need to discourage conspicuous consumption and to effect maximum economy
in the use of scarce materials is implicit in my proposals. In addition, I have made an
attempt to mop up the windfall gains currently being made by producers and middlemen
in certain sensitive commodities, often in the form of undeclared and untaxed profits.
I am sure the House will agree with me that in the present inflationary situation,
accumulation of inventories far in excess of normal requirements of production, must
be discouraged. Some of the recent measures announced by the Reserve Bank of India
seek to achieve this objective by raising the cost of bank credit, and by restricting
credit only for the genuine needs of essential production. One of the fiscal proposals
I shall outline in a few moments seeks to complement the action already taken by the
Reserve Bank on the monetary front, while at the same time helping in raising resources
needed by the Government.
18. I would like to take this opportunity to impress upon State Governments
that they have no less a vital role then the Central Government in contributing to
greater fiscal discipline. In order to reduce their deficits without affecting the pace of
development, they ought to exploit fully the potential offered by agricultural taxation.
At the same time, there is urgent need for a more realistic pricing of services like
irrigation and electricity. I would strongly urge them to take steps in these directions.
4

DIRECT TAXES
19. I shall now explain my tax proposals, dealing first with proposals in the
field of direct taxes. As a part of the anti-inflationary package, I propose to levy a tax
on the gross amount of interest received by scheduled banks on loans and advances
made in India. The banks would be expected to adjust their functioning to this tax and
reimburse themselves to the extent necessary by making appropriate adjustments in
interest rates charged from borrowers.The proposed tax will have both a monetary and
a fiscal impact in that it will serve the purpose both of raising the cost of borrowed
funds and of supplementing Government revenues. The proposed tax will be levied at
the rate of 7 per cent of the gross amount of interest earned by the banks. This would
imply on an average an increase of about 1 per cent in the cost of borrowings from the
banks. Interest on Government securities, as also debentures and other securities issued
by local authorities, companies, and statutory corporations will not be included in the
tax base. Interest received on transactions between scheduled banks will likewise be
exempted from the proposed levy. Interest accruing to scheduled banks before 1st
August, 1974 will be outside the ambit of the proposed measure. The proposed tax
will be allowed as a deduction in computing taxable income under the Income-tax
Act. I propose to introduce a separate Bill shortly to give effect to the proposal. The
yield from this measure will be of the order of As. 60 crores in a full year. For the
remaining part of the current year, however, the revenue will be about Rs.25 crores.
20. In view of large unearned incomes accruing as a result of the inflationary
situation, I propose to increase the tax on capital gains. The deduction from long-term
capital gains allowed in computing the taxable income of non-corporate taxpayers is
being reduced from 35 per cent to 25 per cent where such gains relate to lands and
buildings. In respect of gains arising from transfer of other assets, the deduction is
being reduced from 50 per cent to 40 per cent.
21. The incidence of tax on long-term capital gains is also being increased in
the case of companies. This increase is being brought about by raising the rate of tax
from 45 per cent to 55 per cent in respect of gains relating to lands and buildings. A
lower rate of 47 per cent will be applied in the case of widely-held companies whose
taxable income, excluding long-term capital gains, does not exceed Rs.1 lakh. The
rate of tax applicable on capital gains arising from the transfer of other assets is being
raised from 35 per cent to 45 per cent in the case of all companies. These alterations
in the provisions relating to the capital gains tax will yield about Rs.5 crores in a full
year.
INDIRECT TAXES
22. I now come to my proposals relating to indirect taxes. In order to raise the
needed resources, I have no option but to increase Central Excise duties selectively. In
doing so, it has been my endeavour to keep to the minimum the impact on the poorer
sections of the community. I have also tried to raise duties on those items where the
5

middleman is today retaining a large margin, to the detriment of both the consumer
and the primary producer. These duties will help to mop up unintended gains accruing
to the trade.
23. At present copper and copper alloys in crude form, and wire bars, wire
rods, etc., carry a basic excise duty of Rs.1500. 00 per metric tonne. Specified
manufactures of these carry a rate of Rs.2000.00 per metric tonne, while pipes and
tubes are assessable at 10 per cent ad valorem. The international prices of copper have
been soaring. Even now the bulk of our requirements have to be imported. The
indigenous producers of copper have also been selling their products at prices on par
with the prices of imported goods, and thus enjoy a substantial benefit as their own
cost of production is lower. To siphon off a part of this fortuitous profit, I propose to
increase the basic excise duty on copper in crude form and on wire bars, wire rods,
etc., to Rs.4000. 00 per metric tonne; on specified manufactures of these to Rs.4500.00
per metric tonne; and on pipes and tubes to 20 per cent ad valorem. The existing
provisions for collection of duty at the rate of Rs.500.00 per metric tonne on plates,
sheets, circles, strips and foils made out of duty-paid metal, or metal made out of
specified types of scrap will continue. A lower rate has also been fixed for sheets and
circles cleared in untrimmed condition. The provisions for set-off of duty paid on
copper in crude form if used for the manufacture of copper pipes and tubes will also
continue. Through these proposals, I expect to secure additional revenue to the extent
of Rs.8.40 crores, inclusive of the consequential accrual of increased auxiliary duty,
which is determined as a percentage of the effective basic duty.
24. On similar considerations. I propose to increase the basic duty on
unwrought zinc from Rs. 500.00 to Rs.1500.00 per metric tonne; on specified
manufactures of this from Rs.800.00 to Rs.1800.00 per metric tonne, and on pipes and
tubes from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad valorem. Zinc plates, sheets, circles, strips
and foils made out of duty-paid unwrought zinc, or specified types of scrap, or their
combination, will continue to pay duty at Rs.300.00 per tonne. The additional revenue
accrual from. this will be Rs.5.07 crores, inclusive of the auxiliary duty component.
Imports of copper and zinc will not, however, be liable to any additional countervalling
duty as a result of the increases now proposed on the basic excise duties.
25. With the rise in prices of rayon and synthetic fibres and yarn, the incidence
of duty, based on specific rates, has gone down. I, therefore, propose to step up suitably
the specific rates in respect of nylon filament yarn and staple fibre and filament yarn
of cellulosic origin. This will provide an additional revenue of Rs.11.38 crores. The
concessional rate available to nylon yarn for use in the manufacture of fishing nets
and parachute cords will, however, continue. I am also not bringing acetate yarn within
the purview of these increases.
26. With the objective of reducing the gap in the incidence of the duty at the
yarn stage on fabrics manufactured by the composite mills and the powerloom units,
6

I propose to raise the specific rates of duty on cotton yarn normally going into the
manufacture of superfine, fine and medium-A fabrics manufactured by powerlooms.
The increased rates will also apply to yarn of corresponding counts used in the
manufacture of hosiery, sewing thread etc. Hank yarn in straight reels used by
handlooms will remain unaffected. These changes will thus provide some stimulus to
the handloom industry. These increases will yield an additional revenue of Rs.9.70
crores. Honourable Members will be happy to know that yarn of lower count groups
normally used in the manufacture of medium-B and coarse fabrics is being left
untouched.
27. Due to production constraints, shortages have developed in the availability
of tyres, and on certain categories high premia are being charged by the middleman.
As a mopping-up measure, and to raise revenue, I propose to step up by 5 percent the
ad valorem duty on tyres, other than those meant for scooters, motor cycles and mopeds,
which will continue to carry the present concessional rate. This will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.8.8 crores. Tyres and tubes for cycles, and tyres specially designed for
use in animal-drawn vehicles will, however, continue to be wholly exempt.
28. Honourable Members are aware of the general scarcity of cement, and the
windfall gains being reaped by the dealers.To absorb at least a part of these gains, and
to raise additional revenue, I propose to increase the basic duty on cement from 25 per
cent to 30 per cent ad valorem. Inclusive of the consequential increase in accruals
from the auxiliary duty, this proposal will add Rs.29.37 crores to the revenues.
29. The present tariff rate of basic excise duty on cigarettes is 200 per cent ad
valorem. By a notification, basic duty has been prescribed at 75 per cent ad valorem,
if the value of the cigarettes does not exceed Rs.10.00 per thousand. In respect of
cigarettes having a value higher than Rs.10.00 per thousand, this duty is increased by
3 per cent ad valorem for every additional rupee or part thereof in excess of Rs.10.00
per thousand. As a revenue measure. I propose to raise the rate of basic duty at the
base point (i.e. cigarettes of which the value does not exceed Rs.10.00 per thousand)
from 75 per cent ad valorem to 85 per cent ad valorem. The incremental rate of 3 per
cent ad valorem for every additional rupee or part thereof in excess of the value of
Rs.10.00 per thousand will, however, continue.
30. As the ceiling of 200 per cent ad valorem restricts the duty on the more
expensive brands, I also propose to raise this to 250 per cent ad valorem. I would hope
those fortunate enough to afford the more costly brands will feel more virtuous in the
knowledge that they will now be contributing in larger measure to the exchequer. The
additional revenue from my proposals relating to cigarettes will amount to Rs.16.45
crores, inclusive of the increased accrual by way of auxiliary duty.
31. I also propose to raise the basic duties in respect of pig iron, latex foam
sponge, asbestos cement products and electric lighting bulbs and fluorescent lighting
tubes. These will together yield an additional revenue of Rs.8. 14 crores.
7

32. As a measure for raising additional revenue exclusively for the Centre. I
propose to step up the rates of auxiliary duty on steel ingots, and iron or steel products,
from 75 per cent to 106 per cent of the effective basic duty, and that on skelp, tin
plates and tinned sheets from 50 per cent to 70 per cent of the effective basic duty.
Rails and sleeper bars used for railway track will not, however, attract the increase.
These proposals, while bringing the indigenous prices more in tune with the imported
prices of comparable products, will also help to raise an additional revenue of Rs.26.85
crores. These revised auxiliary duties will as hitherto apply only to indigenous
production, and not result in higher countervailing duty on imports.
33. On certain varieties of cotton fabrics like suiting, gaberdine, furnishing,
blended, embroidered, and impregnated or coated fabrics, I propose for the first time
an effective levy of an auxiliary duty of excise at the rate of 33-1/3 per cent of the
effective basic duty; this will yield an additional revenue of Rs.6. 0 crores.
34. The specific rates of duties on various categories of paper and paper board
were reviewed and stepped up as a part of my budget proposals presented in February,
1974. Since then the steep increases in the prices of most varieties of paper and board
effected by the industry have brought down considerably, in percentage terms, the ad
valorem incidence of the existing specific duties. I am, therefore, constrained to step
up the duty on various categories of paper and paper board for the second time this
year. I accordingly propose to levy an auxiliary duty at the rate of 33-1/3 per cent of
the effective basic duty on all varieties of paper and paper board. Commoner varieties
of printing and writing paper, not exceeding 65 grammes per square metre, used for
exercise books, text books, etc. and assessed at present at a concessional rate of 15
paise per kilogram are being specifically exempted from the proposed auxiliary duty.
Newsprint and hand-made paper and board will also not be affected. This measure
will result in an additional revenue of Rs.13.20 crores.
35. In an effort to narrow the gap between the indigenous and imported prices
of plastics, I propose to increase the auxiliary duty of excise from 20 per cent to 40
per cent of the effective basic duty, and thus raise an additional revenue of Rs.9
crores. However, plastics when imported will as hitherto continue to be exempt from
the countervailing duty, equal to the auxiliary duty of excise.
36. I also propose to increase the auxiliary duty on paints and varnishes from
33-1/3 per cent to 50 per cent of the effective basic excise duty, which will bring an
additional revenue of Rs.1. 80 crores.
37. Till recently DMT and caprolactam were being imported at high
international prices. The indigenous production of DMT has since started while the
caprolactam unit is expected to go into production shortly. Having regard to the prices
at which these products were imported and as a revenue measure, I propose to levy a
duty for the first time at the rate of 50 per cent ad valorem on caprolactam and 25 per
cent ad valorem on DMT. This is expected to yield a revenue of Rs.12.40 crores. The
8

proposed levies will not result in countervailing duties on the imported caprolactam
and DMT.
38. The proposals relating to excise duties will lead to a gain in revenue of
about Rs.166 crores in a full year, of which about Rs.20 crores will accrue to the
States and Rs.146 crores to the Centre.
CUSTOMS DUTIES
39. The inflationary trends in international prices to which I had referred in
my budget speech in February, 1974 continue. In these circumstances, I have decided
to leave unchanged customs duties proper, though additional revenue to the extent of
Rs.1 crore is expected from countervailing duties consequent on the changes proposed
in Central excise duties.
40. Where changes are proposed to be effected by issue of notifications
effective from the 1st August, 1974, I shall in due course lay copies of such notifications
on the Table of the House.
41. Taking Customs and Central Excise duties together and exclusive of States’
share, the additional revenue accruing to the Centre will be of the order of Rs.147
crores in a full year or Rs.98 crores approximately for the rest of the. current financial
year.
42. The various tax proposals that I have outlined will yield a revenue of
approximately Rs.210 crores in a full year and Rs.123 crores in 1974-75 for the Centre.
The States will also receive Rs.22 crores approximately in a full year and Rs.13 crores
approximately during the current year, as a result of these proposals.
43. As I stated earlier, the presentation of fresh taxation proposals is not an
ordinary event. The economic compulsions of the current situation do not leave us
with any really viable alternatives. It is in this perspective I would wish the House to
view and to judge these proposals.
(July 31, 1974)

9

