SPEECH OF SHRI JOHN MATHAI, MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1950-51
Sir, I rise to present the estimated Receipts and Expenditure of the Government
of India for the year 1950-51. This is the first Budget of the Republic of India, and Mr.
Speaker, I consider it a great honour that it has fallen to me to present it to the House.
There is one matter, Sir, which I would like to mention before I proceed any
further,, I have arranged for distribution to honourable Members at the end of today’s
sitting, not merely the Explanatory Memorandum which is usually circulated with the
Budget but also a White Paper on the Budget which contains practically all the material
set out in the Budget speech, in more or less the same form and somewhat amplified.
For this reason, I propose to allow myself today the freedom of speaking somewhat
informally on the matters covered by the Budget, instead of delivering a set address as
is usually done on occasions of this kind. The House will find that the material set out
in the White Paper would give Honourable Members all the data which they would
require for the consideration and discussion of the Budget later in the session. All that
I propose to do at this stage is to give Honourable Members a broad outline of the
Budgetary position and the general economic background of the Budget.
This Budget is being presented under the new Constitution. From that fact there
are two matters that arise to which I would like to invite the attention of the House. The
first is this, that the Constitution lays down a somewhat elaborate procedure for the
consideration and discussion of the Budget. We are not following this year the procedure
prescribed by the Constitution, largely for the reason that this procedure has implications
which it would take the House and this Government a little time to consider, and the
arrangements required for carrying out this procedure would also take a little time. But
there to one rather important change which we propose to make this year. As you, Sir,
announced earlier in the session, we propose to ask the House to set up an Estimates
Committee to scrutinise the expenditure of each Department of Government and of the
Government as a whole. Personally I am looking forward to the work of the Estimates
Committee when it is set up because I think in two directions it is going to exert a
healthy influence upon the course of public expenditure. In the first place, the suggestions
and criticisms which may be made by the Estimates Committee would, in my judgement,
give a useful direction and guidance to the Government in the matter of regulating
expenditure. Secondly I think the knowledge that the expenditure of Government and
of the various Departments of Government would be examined in detail by an
independent authority set up by the House would act as a deterrent to extravagance in
public expenditure.
1

Although it is a matter which, ultimately, has to be decided by the House, I would
like to say. at this stage, that, as far as I am concerned, I would like the Standing Finance
Committee to continue at the same time. There is a real distinction between the work of
the Standing Finance Committee and the work of the proposed Estimates Committee.
The Standing Finance Committee is concerned with specific proposals of expenditure
by each Department of Government, but the Estimates Committee’s business would be
to make a comprehensive examination of expenditure in relation to the resources available
to Government. The real business of the Estimates Committee would, therefore, be
taking the policy and the objectives of Government (with which they are not concerned)
to suggest how this policy and these objectives could be carried out with the least
expenditure of public resources. That, Sir, is the first matter to which I would like to
refer as arising from the introduction of the Constitution.
The second matter is this. The Constitution of India envisages not merely the
India of the Provinces, but also the India of the States. The estimates for the year 195051 which I am going to present to the House would, therefore, cover not merely the
finances of the old Provinces, but would cover also the federal expenditure and the
federal revenues of the integrated States. The result of that is that the estimates of 195051 would not be strictly comparable with the figures of 1949-50 or the preceding years.
The House will realise that that is going to mean a break in the continuity of our budgetary
figures. The year 1947 which saw the partition meant a break in the continuity of our
statistics, and the integration of the States in 1950 is going to mean a further break.
Therefore, this period of 1947 to 1950, from the point of view of comparison of economic
and financial trends over a continuous period of years, will be an awkward period of
transition, and call for laborious work before the Budgetary figures of future years
could be compared with those of past years.
That is looking at the question from the point of view of those interested in
statistical comparisons. But there is, as will be obvious to the House, another way of
looking at this period of transition, because this period of 1947 to 1950 will, I have not
the slightest doubt, appear to the future historian of India as a dividing line between one
segment of our history, of the storied past of India, from another segment of our history
which is just opening out, and which as it widens and moves forward will have witnessed
the fulfilment of the aspirations of the generation that strove to build the New India of
our dreams.
I want at this stage to take the House back to the main economic events that
occurred during the year 1949. What I want to do is to ask the House to survey the
principal economic trends which were in evidence since the last Budget was presented.
It has been a year of great difficulty and of great anxiety. It has been a period of almost
unprecedented difficulties. There were times during the year 1949 when some of us
more immediately concerned with the economic activities of Government felt a sense
of almost overwhelming crisis. But on an objective examination of the facts as they
stand today, I feel I am in a position to tell the House that the stage of crisis at any rate
2

is now definitely past. I do not want to hide from the House or hide from myself that
there are still difficult problems ahead of us. But I think I am justified in saying that we
have now been able to take the measure of these problems and if there are problems in
front of us they are problems which would not be beyond the ability of Government to
meet and to solve in due course.
The first main economic problem to which I would like to refer is the problem
which is compendiously referred to as ‘inflation’. Inflation has many aspects to it. I
want today to confine myself to that aspect of it which is reflected in the level of prices.
The first that I want the House to realise in regard to inflation is that it is a problem
which is not by any means confined to this country. It is a world problem which has
come to us as a legacy principally of the war. It is interesting to trace the difference
between inflation as it was created by the First War and the inflation that has been
generated by the Second World War. In the first war, the position was that the war ended
in 1918 and th6 inflationary trends created by the war continued until 1920. In 1921 a
marked downward trend began.
In the case of the second war, the war ended in 1945. To day we are in the fifth
year after the termination of the war; but the inflationary process set going by the war
still continues in many countries. Not merely does it continue, but in several countries
it is actually on the increase. India, therefore, is finding itself entangled in a world
situation many aspects of which are beyond the control of this country. What exactly
are the causes that distinguish inflation as it emerged from the first war and as it has
emerged from the recent war? The House will appreciate there was much larger
destruction of national assets and productive capacity in the second war. There was a
much larger expenditure in pursuance of the war which resulted in a larger increase in
purchasing power. There was also a large redistribution of purchasing power with the
result that the less well-to-do sections of the population in many countries found
themselves in a position to spend more upon consumable goods than they did before
and a large degree of potential inflation thereby came into existence.
Another factor which is also important, is that the end of the first war was followed
by a relatively long period of lull, People feeling they have been through a war of vast
proportions and another war of that kind was not likely to come again in the near future.
But the end of the second war has coincided almost immediately with talks and thought
of another war. Re-armament is already in the air. Stock piling has already started and
increasing demand has already come into existence for baste and strategic materials.
Therefore, today we are in a position much more difficult that the position created by
the first war.
Taking our own country, we are necessarily affected by all these international
forces. India today has far more points of contact with the outside world than she had at
the end of the first war. We are therefore exposed to the influences that are active in the
world today. On top of it we have had difficult problems created by partition. We have
3

also problems created by the fact that a large part of our expenditure during the war was
met by fiduciary currency backed by foreign assets, instead of by loans and by taxes as
a large part of war expenditure in other countries was met. We are therefore in a specially
difficult position and I ask the House to take that fact into account in judging the
inflationary position in India to-day.
Now, I would like to briefly examine the movement of prices in 1949. As
honourable Members will remember, the Government adopted certain anti-inflationary
measures towards the end of the year 1948 - to be precise, in October, 1948. As the
result of these anti-inflationary measures, prices slowly began to come down from
October, 1948, and that steady downward trend continued until March, 1949. It was a
steady downward movement. I was one of those who, having observed this steady
downward movement during a period of six months, thought, and I think I said so in the
House, that that movement would continue. But my expectations in that matter did not
materalize. On the other hand what happened was that from April 1949 for several
months thereafter the trend of prices was upward and that upward trend continued until,
I think, October 1949, a few weeks after devaluation. Then we took certain special
measures for countering the possible effects of devaluation. The result of those measures
has been that although we have not been able to bring down prices, we have, at any rate,
been able substantially to hold the level of prices. From October right until the end of
January the level of prices remained stationary. The result, therefore, is briefly this; We
have considerable cause for what I may call “negative satisfaction”. I frankly confess
we have not very much cause for positive satisfaction. Although that is the real position,
I want the House to observe certain redeeming features in the situation. Although it is
perfectly true that there has been no fall in prices generally there has been since October
1948, judged by the Economic Adviser’s index Number, a steady fall in prices of
foodgrains from October 1948 till now. As far as the whole group of food articles is
concerned, there has also been a fall, though not to the same extent. The fall in the
general group of foodstuffs might have been greater but for the fact that certain articles
included in the food category behaved in an erratic fashion as the result of certain
special circumstances. I am referring particularly to sugar and gur. But for that, the
whole group of foodgrains would have had shown a more marked decline. That is one
factor which I would like the House to consider as a factor that to some extent redeems
the situation. The other is this, I believe India is one of the few countries in the world
which attempted devaluation in September in which there has been no rise in the general
level of prices as a result of devaluation. If you take for example, the movement of
prices since September in a country like the U.K. you find that there has been a perceptible
rise in prices. We, at any rate, have been able to keep our prices steady. To my mind, it
is a circumstance which offers some room for satisfaction. I have brought the story
right up to the end of January. Since the end of January or since the beginning of February,
I regret to say there have been signs of a slow upward trend and the situation therefore,
needs very careful watching. We have not by any means reached the stage where in this
matter we can afford to stand still. In connection with the rise which has started in our
4

level of prices since the beginning of this month, I would like to bring a particular
circumstance to the notice of the House. If, Sir, you observe the trend of movements of
prices in the various categories covered by our Index Number, you will find principally
the recent rise in prices has been in regard to industrial raw materials.
I consider that a factor of some importance. I could probably make the point clear
to the House by explaining the difference between the movement of world prices after
the devaluation of sterling in 1931 and the movement of world prices after the devaluation
of sterling in 1949. In 1931 when sterling was devaluated, it was followed by a decline
in dollar prices, the result being that prices of commodities of dollar origin in terms of
sterling did not rise to the whole extent of the devaluation. What is apparently happening
today is that the devaluation of sterling has, as far as America is concerned, resulted in
the maintenance of the original level of the prices. Dollar prices have remained steady
since September 1949 on the whole. The result is that sterling prices of industrial
commodities have gone, up almost to the extent of the devaluation. That has happened
as regards not merely the commodities of dollar origin but by psychological reaction
and directly, also in the case of industrial materials of non-dollar origin. Therefore the
movement that we are witnessing today, the upward movement La the prices of industrial
raw materials in our index number is really a symptom of a world movement and the
controlling of that therefore to not entirely in our hands.
Next, Sir, I come to the question of production. I place production second because
the crux of the problem of inflation in our country is increased production. I do not
believe that the monetary factor of inflation to nearly as important in this country as it
to in others. And if we want to find a solution for this problem of inflation, we could do
so effectively only by increasing the quantity of goods and services available in the
country. Now if you take production in 1949, I think there has been a substantial increase
in various important industries- steel, cement, coal, heavy chemicals, paper and
generation of electricity. There are two industries and very important industries in our
country of which that particular proposition cannot be made. The first is cotton textiles
and the other is jute manufactures. In both these cases the limiting factor in the matter
of production is the supply of raw material, particularly as the result of the deadlock
that has arisen in the trade between us and Pakistan. As regards raw cotton, I want to tell
the House quite briefly what Government are doing. We have, as the House knows,
definitely arranged for the import of 10 lakhs of bales of cotton. If the situation needs it,
we are also prepared and we are in a position to arrange for the importation of further
raw cotton. I think also active steps with promising results have been taken in the matter
of increasing the indigenous production of raw cotton. The results so far I think have
been promising.
With regard to raw jute, the position is that the production of raw jute in the
Indian Union has, during the past 2 years, definitely shown signs of improvement. The
estimated production of jute in 1949 is 30 lakhs of bales against 20 in 1948, and we
5

expect as the result of special efforts which are being made by double cropping, by
bringing fallow land under cultivation, by the extension of cultivable lands we are
expecting that the production would go up to somewhere about 50 lakhs in 1950. In the
meantime, I believe there are sufficient stocks of raw jute to maintain our jute mills in
production until the end of the current jute season.
With regard to production of foodgrains, I think the indications are also
encouraging. The estimated production in 1949 is 43 million tons against 41 in 1948
and we have every expectation that in 1950, there would be an increase of 2.8 million
tons over 1949. With regard to the availability of foodgrains, procurement to quite as
important a factor as production. I think the recent figures of procurement have been
satisfactory. The procurement for the eleven months of 1949 ending November is 4.2
million tons against a target of 4.6 for the whole year of twelve months. The procurement
target for 1950 is a million tons above the target of 1949. The conclusion that I would
come to is that although production still leaves a great deal of room for improvement,
there is no cause for anxiety.
There are two important factors which have assisted this increase in production.
The first is the marked improvement that has taken place in railway transport. The
figures that my Honourable colleague the Minister for Railways placed before the House
in the Railway Budget are ample proof of the improvement that has taken place. The
other factor which has helped is the improvement in the labour situation. All the figures
indicate that there has been a perceptible improvement in the relations between labour
and management. There have been fewer labour disputes. There has been quite a marked
reduction in the number of man days lost as the result of industrial disputes. I think that
is a fact that ought to give us encouragement and I want, in this connection, to pay a
tribute to the great labour organisations of this country. They have grown in stature;
they have gathered strength. They have developed a greater consciousness of their
legitimate rights; they have developed a greater sense of self-respect. Along with that, it
seems to me that they have developed also a spirit of patriotism and a sense of
responsibility and of their duty to the other sections of the community, which, to my
mind, justify us in looking forward with confidence to the future of Indian industry.
The third problem that I want to refer to is the situation in the money market. The
conditions in the money market have a direct importance for production. The position
of the short term money market has a direct reaction on current production; the position
in the long term or investment market has a direct re-action upon the development and
expansion of production. Practically all through the first half of 1949 the conditions in
the money market, I regret to say, showed very little improvement. The position in the
short term market was one of acute stringency. The position in the long term market
was one of continued stagnation. It is usual to explain the stagnation in the investment
market by the allegation that capital today is on strike. I have looked into this matter
with some care, and I have come to the conclusion that there is no foundation for this
allegation. The position of the investment market can be fully and intelligibly explained
6

with reference to such factors as increased costs, reduced margin of profits and unstable
economic and psychological conditions which, if they had prevailed in any other country,
would have resulted in exactly the same situation in the investment market; It is
unnecessary to resort to the somewhat far-fetched hypothesis that capital for tactical
reasons to deliberately declining to utilise avenues of sale and gainful employment. It is
quite unnecessary to resort to this thesis. I have made this statement with regard to
capital because, having given some thought to the whole question of industrial relations
in the spirit, may I say, of a detached student, I have come to the conclusion that in spite
of everything that we hear about us, the relations between labour and capital in this
country today are fundamentally sound. The predominant sentiment in this country
today is nationalism and we are not so far removed from the successful completion of
the national struggle for freedom that the country’s interests could be submerged in
People’s minds by sectarian interests. If only Government and Parliament and the Press
would avoid mishandling and misjudging one section or the other, I have not the slightest
doubt in my mind that both sectors of production will continue to play the game.
I said that in the first half of 1949 conditions in the money market were
unsatisfactory. There was a marked fall in bank deposits. There was also an increase in
bank advances. The result was that during the first six months of 1949, the ratio of
deposits to advances which is the test by which we can judge the stringency of the
market -the ratio was higher than in the preceding years. If you take a normal year in
our country, in the slack season, the ratio is somewhere about 45 per cent and in the
busy season about 50; it varies between 45 and 50. In the first half of 1949 it rose above
55, an unhealthy situation. I am glad to say that since July 1949 the position has improved
but it is not improvement of the kind that one would accept as wholly satisfactory,
because part of the improvement is due to the fact not that the deposits have gone up but
that advances have come down, because banks are more cautious and because also of
the deadlock in our trade with Pakistan. But judged by the ratio test, the position is
more satisfactory. That is as far as the short term market is concerned. So far as the
investment or the long-term market is concerned, as the House knows, right from August
194 6 when the great communal disturbances started in Calcutta, there was a continuous
fall in industrial investments which, with occasional ups and downs, continued almost
until July 1949. Since July 1949 there have been signs of revival of confidence and a
restoration of what might be called normal conditions, and I cannot remember a period
since August 1946 when there has been a similar period of six months when the movement
of revival was kept going. I regard the situation with some confidence. It is still too
early to predict a permanent recovery in the investment market. As far as I am able to
judge the activity in the investment market-1 am particularly thinking of the Stock
Exchanges-it is still confined largely to professional operators. I am not for a moment
suggesting that professional operations are unhealthy; but unless the activity of the
professional operator is supplemented and corrected by the activity of the genuine
investor, the investment market will not be sufficiently broad-based, will not be restored
to really healthy conditions, and there is the big problem that is facing us today; what
7

exactly we can do to bring the genuine investor back into the investment market. One of
the reasons why the genuine investor is holding aloof is that he has not got the measure
of confidence which would justify his putting what little he has into investment. Here
again, India is by no means in a peculiar position. The result of the wider distribution of
current national income which has occurred since the war in many countries of the
world is having this effect that large number of people now are having a small margin
of savings in their hands. When the amount of saving that you have is small, you want
a much larger degree of security than you would if you had large amounts to save and
invest. Therefore, since the large number of potential investors in this country belong to
exactly the same class as you and me, it is necessary that the spirit of confidence should
be fostered by every means in our power.
There is just one point in connection with investment to which I would like to
refer before I turn on to other topics, and that is the question of foreign capital. I consider
that foreign capital is necessary in this country, not merely for the purpose of
supplementing our own resources, but for the purpose of instilling a spirit of confidence
among our own investors. I would like to make just this brief proposition that any
considerable assistance in the way of capital from foreign countries must hereafter be
looked for not in the shape of fixed interest bearing loans and bonds, but in the shape of
equity capital on the basis of joint participation on strict business considerations without any political strings attached to it. I consider that kind of assistance desirable from
our point of view, and feasible from the point of view of the foreign investor.
The House will appreciate the change that has come over the investment market
in foreign countries. The difference between the position today and the position in the
19th century is this: In the 19th century when foreign capital sent out from advanced
countries to undeveloped countries, they had the security born of political control. In
other words, colonialism provided the necessary sense of security to the foreign investor.
Today, since colonialism has disappeared, the only way in which the same sense of
security could be imparted is by friendly agreement. Therefore it is necessary that we
should consider providing reasonable conditions of security and fair treatment for those
who are willing to take the risk of investing their money in this country. The statement
that the Prime Minister made last year still represents our policy in this matter and I
believe that the terms and conditions outlined in that statement ought to provide
reasonable security for foreign investors.
May I in this connection also refer to the question of the Dividend Limitation
Act. The House will remember that originally the Bill as it was placed before the House
was intended to extend the operation of the Act until December 1950. The Select
Committee of the House on a thorough examination of the position decided to advance
it from December 1950 to March 1951. The question now arises whether this Act should
be renewed. When I spoke on the Bill last year in this House I said that the whole
position would be fully examined and unless the situation was such that the continuance
of the Act was necessary Government would not extend it. We have now decided not to
8

extend the Act for the following reasons. On account of the general fall in the level of
profits the limit fixed In the Act is practically inoperative. Secondly, as an anti-inflationary
measure; the effect of the Act has been negligible. Thirdly, it has had a disproportionately
depressing effect on the investment market. For these various reasons we have decided
not to extend the Act.
The next problem I want to deal with is the balance of payments. The House is
fairly familiar with the problem of balance of payments because we have discussed it
on the floor of the House several times in recent months. The main fact is that for the
period July 1948 to June 1949 we had to draw from our sterling balances to the extent
of £ 81 million, in addition to the amount provided in the agreement of 1948. The
position since then has shown improvement.
In connection with this question of balance of payments there has been a great
deal of criticism regarding the Open General Licence and the articles which were
admitted into the country under the O.G.L. the main charge against Government being
that under the Open General Licence a large quantity of goods of a purely luxury character
was admitted into the country. On a careful examination of the figures I am satisfied
that what can be called luxury goods amounted to not more than 1.5 to 2 per cent of the
total imports. My Hon’ble colleague the Commerce Minister has more than once
explained to the House that the reason why it has become necessary to import articles
of this kind is that in the bilateral agreements that we make with other countries, these
countries generally insist upon a certain proportion of their non-essential goods being
imported into India. They do that for this obvious reason. We as one of the parties in an
agreement have no right to say “We will export all the commodities that we want to
send to your country and in return we will accept only such articles as we specify”. That
is not businesslike: in actual practice it is not workable. That is the attitude of the
Commerce Ministry and it is perfectly valid. But I want to bring to the notice of the
House a consideration which has some importance for the Finance Ministry. If we decided
to confine our imports completely to essential articles, I can assure the House that the
Budget of this country would become unmanageable. Because from the revenue point
of view these essential articles are not particularly profitable. If, for example, you confine
your imports to foodgrains and plant and machinery, foodgrains bear no duty at all,
agricultural machinery bears no duty at all, industrial machinery bears a duty of 5 per
cent, industrial raw materials bear relatively low rates of duty. If, therefore, I confined
imports to these articles, the customs revenue would be exactly half of what it is today.
We would be faced with a huge deficit which would create inflation in its turn. It is a
fact which is recognized in other countries that for the sake of maintaining a reasonable
level of customs revenue it is justifiable to allot a certain portion of your exchange
resources for articles which bring revenue to the exchequer.
I said there has been improvement since July 1949. At the end of June 1949 our
Sterling Balances stood at 820 crores. In the first week of September they declined to
776. A drop of 44 crores. Since September they continued to rise, and the latest figure
9

that I have is 846 crores. In other words, in the course of seven and a half months there
has been not merely no decline, there has been a surplus of 26 crores. During this
period our dollar receipts also exceeded our dollar payments. As the House is aware
this situation is due to a number of temporary causes the suspension of dollar licences,
the late issue of import licences and partly the loan that we have had from the International
Bank. But I think the figures of exports are sufficiently encouraging for us to hope that
there has been a definite turn for the better as regards our balance of payments. As Mr.
Neogy told the House the other day, the figures of exports for November and December
were practically record figures.
There is one aspect of the matter, however, which the House ought to realize. The
figures undoubtly show an improvement for the time being. But there is no room for
complacency. It is much too soon for us to think in this matter of resting on our oars. A
balance of external payments which is based upon a drastic reduction of imports and by
continued releases of our accumulated balances abroad is an unhealthy balance. A healthy
balance is the sort of balance that you attain at the highest possible level of imports as
well as exports. If you look at the present size of our Sterling Balances, making allowance
for an adequate reserve against our currency in foreign assets, and assuming for the
time being that the releases would he more or less at the average rate of the past two
years, our Sterling Balances are not likely to last us more than six or seven years.
Therefore, it seems to me a matter of the highest importance that we should begin to
plan for an external economy which would be self-balancing. And that can be done
only by a stimulation of exports. I am glad to say that the steps that have been taken
recently by the Ministry of Commerce in respect of their export drive have already
produced results which justify our looking forward with confidence to the future.
When you come to the question of exports again, the crux of the problem is
production, more production and still more production. Whichever way you look at the
economic difficulties of this country, over and over again at every turn you come up
against the problem of increased production. Government naturally, therefore, attach
the very highest importance to this question of increasing the level of production.
The House will remember that early in this session the President announced to
the House that a Planning Commission would be set up. It is necessary to undertake a
review of our existing programme of development and our existing schemes of
production. The geographical and economic facts on which the present programme is
based no longer hold good, the estimate of financial resources on which the existing
programme is based is no longer valid, and public opinion rightly demands a different
kind of approach to the whole problem of development. In view of these facts,
Government have decided to set up a Planning Commission as announced by the
President. The composition of the Commission has been settled. The Commission will
10

consist of the following:
Chairman:
Deputy Chairman:
Members:

Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru
Mr. Gulzari Lal Nanda, Labour Minister in the Bombay
Government
Mr. Chintamani Deshmukh, formerly Governor of the Reserve
Bank and now our representative in matters of external finance
Mr. Gaganvihari Lal Mehta, President of the Indian Tariff Board
Mr. R. K. Patil, Food Commissioner of the Government of
India
(A fourth Member whose name would be announced later).

Mr. N.R. Pillai, the Secretary of the Cabinet, will function as the Secretary of the
Commission and will be assisted, as Deputy Secretary, by Sardar Tarlok Singh, Deputy
Secretary in the Finance Ministry. The terms of reference and other matters relating to
the Commission will be announced in due course.
Before I leave this question of balance of payments, I want to make a brief reference
to our position vis-à-vis Pakistan. Unfortunately, the deadlock with Pakistan over the
exchange issue still continues. We have expressed our agreement to the proposal that
there should be a joint discussion between the two countries. Our proposal is that that
discussion should cover all matters which are relevant to the economic relations between
the two countries, but so far the Pakistan Government have not seen their way to
extending the scope of the conference as we have suggested. They are definitely opposed
to the question of prices and the exchange ratio being brought within the purview of the
discussion. As far as we are concerned, we don’t think that a conference which is not
able to discuss prices and the exchange ratio would serve any useful purpose. That is
how the matter stands at present.
As the House knows, the admission of Pakistan as a member of the International
Monetary Fund has been agreed to although the admission has not become effective yet
I presume, therefore, in the near future the International Monetary Fund will examine
the question of the exchange value of the Pakistan currency. I don’t want to anticipate
the opinion of the International Monetary Fund, but I think I must make a few relevant
facts clear. Firstly, that if Pakistan has an overall favourable balance, which from the
figures I have seen I doubt, that favourable balance is due entirely to her favourable
balance with India. Secondly, this favourable balance with India is due to a very large
extent to the open door policy in trade matters which we had adopted towards Pakistan
and the restrictive policy adopted by Pakistan towards India. Thirdly, from such facts as
have come to my notice, Pakistan has recently been running a deficit both on her sterling
and on her dollar accounts. In view of this, it seems to me an anomaly that Pakistan
could remain in the sterling area and yet decline to devalue her currency as a means of
rectifying her adverse balance like every other member of the sterling area. Lastly,
what ever rate may be agreed to by the International Monetary Fund for the Pakistan
11

currency, it will not, in practice, result in a normal, restoration of trade between India
and Pakistan unless that rate fits the facts of the economic situation.
Now, generally to sum up the economic position, let me repeat that although the
position is still replete with dangers and calls for the utmost care and watchfullness,
there to, in my opinion, no cause whatever for pessimism. Government have been,
strongly and widely criticised for the way in which they have handled the economic
situation. I do not, for a moment, complain of this criticism. On the other hand, I welcome
it and I welcome it for two reasons. First of all, I think it has had a very stimulating
effect on members of Government. All of us are the better for this criticism. Secondly,
I think it has done a great deal of good to the people who make the criticism. My own
observation of democratic Governments is that it is the great advantage of a political
democracy that under it, the Government provides, a target for all the criticism and fire
going in the country, it provides a very useful and essential outlet for the suppressed
emotions of people which, but for this outlet, might some day burst and break up societyMr. Speaker, even they serve whose business is just to get shot.
Sir, I now turn to the revenue and expenditure of Government. As regards the
current year, 1949-50, Members will remember that last year I estimated a total revenue
of about Rs. 323 crores and a total expenditure of Rs. 3221/2 crores, leaving a small
surplus of about Rs. 49 lakhs. The revised estimates now show a total revenue of a little
over Rs. 332 crores and a total expenditure of a little over Rs. 336 crores, thus converting
the token surplus of Rs. 49 lakhs into a deficit of Rs. 3.74 crores. May I say, in passing
that there was a time, in the course of the year, when I expected to be faced with a
deficit of much bigger dimensions? Therefore, this small deficit of Rs. 3.74 crores, I
regard with a sense of relief.
There are various minor changes both on the side of receipts and on the side of
expenditure which cancel out. The outstanding fact is this: defence expenditure during
the current year went up from the estimated figure of over Rs. 157 crores to about
Rs. 170 crores - an increase of about Rs. 122/3 crores. Against that customs revenue
went up by about Rs. 9 crores. The difference between the increase in the defence
expenditure and the increase in customs revenue gives exactly the measure of the deficit.
The increase in defence expenditure, the House will appreciate, was due to inevitable
circumstances. When I put my estimates before the House last year I made it clear that
my estimates were based on the assumption that the ‘Cease Fire Agreement’ would lead
to a peaceful solution of the Kashmir problem. That anticipation did not materialise and
we did not think it right or safe in the interests of the country not to make the necessary
provision.
As regards the customs revenue, the increase is largely due to the fact that we had
a very liberal import policy working over the greater part of the year and also we have
had some extra receipts from export duties levied since devaluation.
12

I will now come to the estimates for 1950-51. I want the House again to appreciate
that the figures for 1950-51 are not strictly comparable with the figures of 1949-50,
because the finances of the States come into the picture. The position regarding financial
arrangements between the Union and the States is this. We appointed a Committee to
go into the whole question of the financial arrangements necessary on account of the
integration of the States. Mr. V.T. Krishnamachari presided over that Committee which
did very valuable work. Government have, with slight modifications, accepted the
recommendations of this Committee.
I will briefly summarise the recommendations. They boil down to this that the
integrated States, acceding States, would be placed on exactly the same footing as the
old provinces, the Centre having responsibility for Federal Subjects and Services and
the Centre also taking over the Federal assets and liabilities. In several cases where
what was once a single composite Government is broken up In this way on a functional
basis, serious financial dislocation results. In such cases what we have agreed to do is
that the whole difference between the Federal revenues which the States have surrendered
and the Federal expenditure which the States have been saved, would be reimbursed to
the States. This arrangement is to last for a transitional period of ten years. During the
first five years of this ten-year period the reimbursement will be made in full-the whole
of the difference between Federal revenue and Federal expenditure. During the next
five years reimbursement would be on a diminishing scale. At the end of this ten-year
period the whole matter would be subject to further review. But it is our expectation
that the States would be able so to adjust their financial resources that there would be
little demand on the Centre.
With regard to States which are not likely to suffer any financial dislocation, that
is, States which are able under the financial integration programme to make a surplus,
will be allowed to retain the surplus. The Privy Purse of the original rulers would come
out of this surplus. Those States would however he allowed to retain their share of the
divisible pool of the income tax. Now this is with regard to the integrating States - both
the continuing states and the Unions. With regard to States which have been merged
into the Provinces, the Krishnamachari Committee did not go specifically into that
question; but they had dealt with the individual case of Baroda. What they said with
regard to Baroda was that the principle which they had proposed in regard to acceding
States should be adopted also in regard to Baroda merged in the Bombay Province, the
reimbursement being made to the Province into which the State is merged. That
suggestion they made with regard to Baroda and we have accepted that and we have
extended it to all Provinces into which States have been merged.
As regards States which have been constituted into Chief Commissionerships,
the House realises, the problem does not arise because we are responsible for federal
and for provincial expenditure.
At the existing level of taxation, the total revenue for 1950-51 is estimated at
Rs. 347.5 crores and the total expenditure at Rs. 337.88 crores, leaving a surplus of
9.62 crores. On the revenue side the principal changes are: Customs show a drop of
13

very nearly 14 crores, due to our present policy of strict limitation of imports. Income
tax shows an increase of nearly 35 crores which is due to three factors. First of all it
allows for the income tax derived from the integrated States. Then there is the larger
receipts that we expect by a prompter collection on current assessments and by better
recoveries of arrears. Lastly, a considerable part of it represents the advanced payments
made under section 18A of the Income Tax Act which have been taken to revenue
instead of deposit, maintaining the accounting change which was made two years ago
and which we expect to complete in 1951-52.
On the expenditure side, in 1949-50 the revised figures of defence expenditure
show an expenditure of Rs. 170 crores. We are providing for 1950-51 an expenditure of
168 crores for Defence. This sum of Rs. 168 crores includes Rs. 8 crores for the pay,
allowances and maintenance of the Indian State Forces which were taken over under
the integration scheme. The intention is to bring up the training, equipment and
establishment of the State forces to the same standard as the rest of the Indian Army,
and my Hon. colleague the Defence Minister expects hat these forces will, after the
training, be indistinguishable from the regular Indian Array in efficiency and in fighting
spirit. Defence represents 50 per cent of the expenditure which is a high ratio; but in
view of the present circumstances I want to make a qualification to these estimates
similar to the qualification I made with regard to the estimates of last year. These estimates
are based on the assumption that no abnormal developments will occur.
Our policy, as the Prime Minister has declared more than once, is to contribute in
every way we can to the maintenance of peace and to the employment of peaceful
methods to the settlement of international disputes. As anybody who knows the Prime
Minister will appreciate that declaration has been made from the highest of motives
and with the completest sincerity of purpose. if, however, contrary to our expectation
events so develop that the peace and security of this country are endangered, Government
will have no hesitation in raising whatever finance may be required for meeting the
situation. Government will not hesitate to call upon the people to make whatever
sacrifices may be necessary for safeguarding the vital interests of the country.
Now I come to the estimate of Civil expenditure. The Civil expenditure estimate
for 1950-51 is 169.87 crores against 166.04 crores for the revised estimate of 1949-50,
showing an increase of 3.83 crores. Hon. Members will straightaway ask: “is this what
your much boosted economy campaign has led to ?” May I stop for a moment and offer
a word of explanation, because, I think, it is important that the House must know the
real position?
This figure of 169.87 includes expenditure under the following items:
Administration of States taken over as Chief Commissionership;
Administration of Central subjects in States and Unions, under the integration
scheme;
14

Privy purses of Indian rulers with whom we have made solemn agreements and
Grants by the Centre under the financial integration scheme.
These four items of expenditure aggregate to 26.18 crores. Deducting that you
get a figure of 143.69 which is the comparable figure with 166.04 in 1949-50 a reduction
of 22.35 crores. I would like to give the House another breakdown of this total of 169
crores. It includes such special items as these:
Relief of displaced persons;
Food subsidies and bonuses on production of food;
Expenses of the coming elections;
Pre-partition payments due to our own people.
These amount to 30.34 crores which would leave a balance of 139.53. Now taking
this balance of 139.53, it includes expenditure on tax collection. My experience to the
more you spend on tax collection, the more you get in return, a good deal more. Therefore
it to a good investment. Another item is interest charges, pensions, and debt redemption
charges amounting to very nearly 44 crores. You cannot touch a pie of it. Then there are
the grants in aid both to the States and Provinces. Then there is expenditure on various
nation-building activities, scientific services, agriculture, medical, health and so on.
After allowing for these various items of expenditure we are left ultimately with
a balance of 36.59 crores and I suggest very respectfully to the House that the field of
expenditure to which economy cuts are properly applicable is denoted by this figure. I
am not for a moment suggesting that economy even to this extent is to be despised. It is
my intention to watch the course of public expenditure in the coming year with the
closest possible care. A Finance Minister who does not do it is not worth his salt and I
trust I shall have the fullest confidence of the House and of the Estimates Committee
which the House will appoint in this essential but somewhat thankless job.
The estimated surplus is, as I told the House, 9.62 crores. I will explain later how
I propose to deal with it.
Now I come to the capital budget. The figures for capital expenditure, meaning
thereby development expenditure by the Centre, loans to states for long-term expenditure,
expenditure from depreciation and Reserve Funds, stand like this:
For 1949-50 the budget estimate was 203 crores.
Revised figure for 1949-50 is 155 crores.
Budget figure for 1950-51 is 133 crores.
I will now take the capital receipts, meaning by that revenue taken to reserve,
borrowing in the market, small savings and foreign loans (foreign loans in this case are
15

loans from the International Bank). The figures areBudget for 1949-50

140 crores.

Revised figure for 1949-50

101 crores.

Budget figure for 1950-51

148 crores.

As regards the more important of these receipts viz., loans from the market the
House will remember that we were able to raise only 40 crores in 1949-50 against our
estimate of 85 crores. From small savings I expected 371 crores while it yielded only
26. But in view of the signs of improvement that are visible, I am estimating 75 crores
for 1950-51 from market borrowings and 28 crores from small savings.
Apart from capital expenditure, we have other non-recurring expenditure to meet.
There is the redemption of our permanent debt like the 21/2.per cent loan of 1950 we are
going to pay. Also the outstanding on the 41/2 per cent loan of 1950-55. We have also to
pay the first instalment of our dues to the World Bank this year and there are certain
Railway Annuities falling due. Altogether the discharge of permanent debt would mean
about Rs.48 crores. Taking all our non-recurring receipts and expenditure i.e., those
outside the revenue budget, the deficit figures stand as follows:In 1949-50 budget we estimated a deficit on capital account of 134 crores. The
revised estimate shows a deficit of Rs. 120 crores. For 1950-511 estimate a deficit of
Rs. 24 crores. Taking all Government transactions and allowing for them our Cash
Balances position would be as follows:At the end of 1949-50 I expect our cash balances will stand approximately at
Rs. 95 against a figure of Rs. 58 which I estimated in my budget last year. At the end
of 1950-511 expect the balances would stand at Rs. 7 8 crores.
Now, Sir, I turn to the taxation proposals. I have no proposals to make for any
increase in the taxes either indirect or direct. As regards indirect taxation a few weeks
ago by executive order we reduced the excise duty on cotton piece-goods on super-fine
from 25 per cent to 20 per cent and on fine from 61/4 per cent to 5 per cent. These
reductions have been taken into account into the budget and I propose to incorporate
them in the Finance Bill. Although it is not really a taxation measure, I want to invite
the attention of the House to the fact that the Budget estimates provide for an expenditure
of Rs. 11 crores for subsidising imported cotton used for the manufacture of yarn for
the benefit of the handloom weavers.
With regard to postal and telegraph charges our proposals are these. In accordance
with the practice in other countries, it is proposed to introduce concessional rates in
respect of local deliveries. For letter, for the first tola, it is proposed to reduce the rate
from two annas to one anna. For every subsequent tola, the existing rate of one anna
will remain unchanged. For local deliveries, the rate for post-cards would be reduced
16

from nine pies to six pies. May I say in passing that Government intend that this
concessions should not by any mean be confined to urban areas, but by a liberal
interpretation of the rules relating to local deliveries and by extension of sorting offices,
this would be extended as much as possible to rural areas. With regard to telegrams, the
proposals are that the basic minimum charge for an ordinary telegram should be reduced
from nine annas to eight annas. The basic minimum charge for express telegrams will
be reduced from Rs. 1-2-0 to Rs. 1. With regard to telephone rates, the maximum trunk
call rate for a three-minute call will be reduced from Rs. 16 to Rs. 12, for a six minute
call from Rs. 32 to Rs. 24. It is proposed also to extend slightly the periods for which
calls can be made at concessional rates. My Hon. colleague the Minister for
Communications expects, and rightly, that with these concessional rates, traffic will
more than correspondingly increase. May I say can we trust my Hon. colleague the
Minister for Communications to see that the traffic increases according to schedule.
With regard to direct taxation, our proposals are the following: First, the Business
Profits Tax to be abolished. This was introduced three years ago as a temporary measure
of taxation to replace the Excess Profits Tax. With the present greatly reduced levels of
profit, this tax is bearing hardly upon industrial concerns. It bears more directly upon
equity capital, capital which bears the risk rather than the fixed interest bearing capital.
The receipts from the Business Profits Tax have been steadily falling. We are today
three years after it was imposed and there is no justification for maintaining this Tax.
Secondly, with regard to income tax, I have three proposals to make. The maximum rate
of income tax to be reduced from five annas to four annas. The rate applicable to the
slab 10,000 to 15,000 to be reduced from three and a half annas to three annas. As
regards the slabs below this, last year, I made some change, the result of which in
conjunction with the relief on earned income applicable to income tax, slabs below Rs.
10,000 today bear a percentage rate which is lower than the rates in force in 1939-40.
My third proposal in regard to income tax is that the exemption limit for an undivided
family, which was raised from As. 3, 000 to Rs. 5,000 last year, should be raised to Rs.
6,000. With regard to the Corporation Tax, I propose that the Corporation, Tax should
be increased from two annas to two and a half annas. But the net result is that in
conjunction with the reduction in the maximum income tax rate, the total company rate
of taxation will be reduced from seven to six and a half annas. As regards Super Tax,
there are two proposals. It is proposed to abolish the distinction between earned and
unearned income and to levy a uniform rate on both. This distinction in the matter of
Super Tax is not recognised in any other country as far as I know and the administrative
difficulties in applying it have been enormous.
The second proposal is that the maximum super-tax rate will be reduced from
nine annas in the case of earned income and ten annas in the case of unearned income to
a uniform rate of eight and a half annas for both earned and unearned income and will
be applicable to incomes above 1.21 lakhs of rupees. The Super-tax rates applicable to
slabs below the highest will in the decending order he eight annas, seven and a half
17

annas, seven annas, six annas, four annas and three annas. The maximum rate of personal
taxation in the country will therefore be twelve and a half annas or about 78 per cent.
The total amount of revenue involved in this tax reduction is about 15 crores, of which
the Centre will bear about 8 crores and the States about 7 crores leaving a final surplus
of Rs. 1.31 crore for 1950-51. The share of the States in the divisible pool will not,
however, be affected as compared with the budget estimates of 1949-50. In the budget
estimates of 1949-50 the provinces share of the divisible pool of income tax was
40.45 crores. On the revised figures for 1949-50 their share will he 45.74 crores.
Allowing for all these tax reliefs, the budget for 1950-51 provides a share of a little
over 43 crores for the States. I may point out that with regard to the Integrated States;
in many cases where the difference between Federal revenue and Federal expenditure
to reimbursed to the States, their share of the divisible pool of income tax will be set
of against this grant so that practically the whole of this will be available to the other
provinces. The Deshmukh Award will apply from the 1st April until the Finance
Commission has reported, and it is the intention of Government to set up the Finance
Commission at the earliest possible date.
There are two general considerations which I wish to mention with regard to
these taxation proposals. I have for some time held the view that the present level of
taxation in this country is uneconomic in the sense that the economy of the country
cannot bear it. I know there is considerable body of academic economic opinion in the
country which holds a different view, but I am perfectly clear in my own mind that the
effect of the present level of taxation is not disinflationary but positively inflationary,
because, if you take the line that the solution to the problem of inflation to production,
then a very high level of taxation which reduces the margin of saving and the amount
available for investment to a potential inflationary force.
There is another general consideration that I want to mention. It is a matter of
regret to me that I have had to make these adjustments in taxation within the existing
framework of our tax structure. I should have preferred to make these adjustments on
the basis of a more fundamental revision of our tax structure, but I have refrained from
doing so because we are still in the middle of a very difficult period of transition and
our receipts and our expenditure are still in such a very fluid state that no responsible
person could undertake a drastic revision of the tax structure at this stage. Also we do
not have sufficient data on which we could make a scientific revision of the present
position. It is for that purpose that Government have act up a Committee to inquire into
the whole question of national income and its distribution. That Committee which is
composed of three of the most distinguished economists and statisticians of this country
together with three foreign advisers equally distinguished, I expect, will be able to give
us a report by the end of 1950 on the basis of which, I hope, Government would he able
to make some satisfactory proposals regarding our taxation system.
Sir, this to all that I have to say in regard to budgetary matters. I must apologise
for having detained the House so long. In so drawing on their time and patience my
18

excuse is that this to a budget presented at a very important time in India’s history. I
may be pardoned for dealing at come length with some aspects of our general economic
and financial position.
Sir, I must apologise also for the unconventional character of my speech. There
my excuse is that I have always held that a Government Budget in the last analysis is a
human document in the sense that it involves and has reactions upon the experiences
and the emotions of multitudes of men and women all over the country. I think therefore
it to appropriate that its presentation to the people’s representatives in Parliament should
be somewhat less impersonal than has been customary with us hitherto.
Mr. Speaker in conclusion may I thank you again and the House for the indulgence
you have shown me
(FEBRUARY 28, 1950)

19

