SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1974-75

Sir.
I rise to present the revised estimates for 1973-74 and the budget estimates for
1974-75.
2.
This As the fourth regular budget of the Union Government which I have
been privileged to present to this House. The principal concern of every Central budget
has to be to strike a proper balance between the requirements of accelerated growth,
stability, greater social justice and self-reliance. In the long run, these objectives are
self-reinforcing. In the short run, however, a reconciliation of these objectives is not
an easy task even under favourable conditions. During the last three years conditions
have not been favourable; in fact they have been far from normal in many ways. In
each of these years, we had to face new challenges of extraordinary dimensions. We
have tried to meet those challenges to the best of our ability. I shall, however, readily
admit that, because of unusually severe strains caused by a combination of certain
national and international factors beyond our control, progress in achieving our
objectives has fallen short of expectations.
3.
I would like to state frankly that in the coming financial year the economy
will be faced with even greater challenges. lts strength and adaptability will be severely
tested. The steep rise in the price of crude oil and also some other commodities has
turned the terms of trade sharply against us and has rendered our tasks exceptionally
difficult. Recent developments must, however, be viewed in a wider historical
perspective. Nowhere in the world has the process of social and economic change
been smooth or free from ups and downs. I find no reason, therefore, to lose heart or
to start questioning our basic goals and objectives. Our socio-economic objectives
remain as relevant as before. Our commitment to our goals is as resolute as ever. We
cannot give up the war against poverty, ignorance and disease because the going is
more difficult than anticipated, though our tactics may need to be readjusted to changing
circumstances.
THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
4.
As the House is aware, the Government has been deeply concerned about
the acute inflationary pressures that have prevailed in the economy during the last two
years. The measures that have been adopted to deal with these inflationary pressures
are well known to the Honourable Members. It is a matter of deep regret to me that
despite these measures prices have continued to rise. The House will appreciate that
1

the pressure on prices was inevitable as a result of the unsatisfactory performance in
the field of agricultural production in two successive years, 1971-72 and 1972-73. The
steep fall of 9.5 per cent in agricultural output in 1972-73 was bound to upset the
delicate balance between demand and supply. Because of a much sharper increase in
international prices, the substantial imports of food grains that we arranged were also
unable to exercise a stabilising influence on domestic prices. Even with a more normal
kharif crop in 1973, the pressure on prices has not abated in view of other inflationary
forces at work in the economy.
5.
It appears certain that the national income in 1973-74 will record a
significant growth; this will help to neutralise the unsatisfactory behaviour of national
income in the two previous years. It is, however, a matter of deep concern to us that
in the Fourth Plan our overall rate of growth has been much lower than the Plan target.
It is also a matter of deep regret that the upsurge in industrial production that was
evident in 1972 was not sustained in 1973. The available indicators suggest that there
was hardly any increase in the rate of growth of industrial production in 1973. It will
be a major objective of our economic policy to revive the tempo of industrial activity
in 1974. To secure an adequate rate of growth is the challenge that we face in the Fifth
Five Year Plan.
6.
As the House is aware, in order to supplement domestic supplies,
Government imported significant quantities of food grains and vegetable oil from
abroad during 1973-74. These imports were necessary for the well-being of the nation,
but have naturally greatly inflated our import bin. Fortunately, our exports have grown
at a satisfactory rate and, as a result, the deterioration in our balance of payments has
been contained within manageable proportions, However, it is no use minimising the
likely adverse effect on our balance of payments which will inevitably arise as a result
of the steep increase in the prices of crude oil and of commodities like fertilizer and
non-ferrous metals. In the long run, among the most important steps by which our
economy can adjust to this massive structural shift in our terms of trade, without
affecting our growth prospects, is by replacing oil, wherever possible by other
domestically available sources of energy, and by intensifying the programme for oil
exploration. In this context, the highest priority attaches to securing a significant
increase in the production of coal in the shortest possible time. Even so, a large
increase in our import bill is inevitable, and this will necessitate a significant increase
in our export earnings. The oil crisis, while no doubt adding to our difficulties, has
already created new export opportunities in respect of products such as jute textiles,
cotton textiles and leather goods. We must grasp this opportunity and do everything in
our power to maximise our export earnings. A comprehensive review of our export
prospects has been undertaken. This review will enable us to launch a well articulated
programme for exploiting fully our export potential.
7.
In my budget speech last year, I had listed control of inflation, promotion
of higher levels of savings and investment, greater viability of our external payments,
2

and generation of new employment opportunities as the most pressing immediate
tasks before the nation. The steep increase in prices in the last one year, the severe
pressure on the balance of payments that will inevitably arise in the wake of higher
prices of oil and other international commodities, and the stagnation of industrial
production in 1973 have lent an added urgency to these tasks. The relatively poor
performance of the economy last year should not give rise to a growing feeling of
doubt, uncertainty and cynicism. We must combat these attitudes and preserve the
people’s faith in our democratic polity as an effective vehicle of social change.
REVISED ESTIMATES 1973-74
8.
The House will recall that the budget estimates for 1973-74 had envisaged
a deficit of Rs.87 crores. This excluded provision for expenditure arising out of the
recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, since the Commission’s report was
not available at the time of formulation of the budget proposals. It was anticipated that
the acceptance of these recommendations would raise the budget deficit to a level
substantially higher than Rs.87 crores. However, subsequent events, largely an
outgrowth of the steep fall in agricultural output in 1972-73, have led to a much
greater deterioration in the budgetary position than was originally anticipated.
9.
As Honourable Members are aware, extensive drought relief operations,
started on account of the widespread and unprecedented drought in 1972-73, had to be
continued to a large extent in 1973-74 also. At the peak of these operations 1,43,740
relief works were opened over the entire country, and 93 lakhs of people were employed.
It was hoped that with the onset of the monsoon in 1973-74, and increasing involvement
of the labour force in agricultural operations, the number of people employed on relief
works would diminish appreciably. Unfortunately this did not happen. Consequently
the Central Government had to continue massive assistance to State Governments on
this account. Honourable Members will recall that a sum of Rs.100 crores was provided
in the current year’s budget for this purpose. This provision proved to be wholly
inadequate and had to be stepped up by another Rs.220 crores.
10. In this connection I would invite the attention of Honourable Members to
the observations of the Finance Commission regarding expenditure on relief for natural
calamities. The Commission has urged that instead of incurring expenditure on relief
on an ad hoe basis, provision should be made on a much larger scale for development
of drought and flood-prone areas in the Fifth Plan, both in the State and Central
sectors. Following these recommendations it has been decided to integrate these
programmes with development plans to the extent possible.
11. Apart from larger assistance provided to State Governments for expenditure
on natural cab- amities relief, provision for special assistance to States to meet gaps in
their resources and for specified projects, had also to be increased. The budget provided
an amount of Rs.198 crores for this purpose, and this will have to be stepped up by
nearly Rs.91 crores.
3

12. The Central exchequer had to bear other burdens as well. The expenditure
on food subsidy will be higher than the provision of Rs.130 crores by Rs.121 crores
despite some revision in the issue prices of food grains. This is essentially due to the
high cost of imported food grains.
13. The direct impact of the price rise on Government spending arises from
the increased quantum of dearness allowance provided to Government employees this
year. Honourable Members will recall that in accepting the recommendations of the
Third Pay Commission we had agreed to a liberalised formula for dearness allowance
to enable low paid Government employees to get adequate compensation for the rise
in the cost of living. On this basis, the four installments of dearness allowance we
have sanctioned will cost the exchequer nearly Rs.100 crores.
14. The impact of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission was
estimated at Rs.150 crores. This was a large commitment, particularly in the context
of the difficult economic situation prevailing in the country, and was based on the
expectation that we would accept most of the Commission’s recommendations. We
have in fact agreed to make some significant improvement’s in the Pay Commission’s
recommendations regarding the pay structure of Government employees; these
improvements alone are likely to cost the exchequer Rs.61 crores a year on a recurring,
and Rs.25 crores on non-recurring basis. The Government has stretched its resources
to the utmost in order to meet the demands of its employees. I sincerely hope that they
will appreciate this, and do their best to improve their efficiency and productivity.
15. On the receipts side, there have been shortfalls. The stagnation in
production in a number of major sectors of industry, caused by shortage of raw materials
and power cuts, has adversely affected receipts from excise duties. Shortfall on this
account is estimated to be Rs.107 crores.
16. As the Railway Minister stated yesterday, the finances of the Railways in
1973-74 have been under considerable strain for reasons dealt with at length in his
speech. The net additional impact of the financial working of the Railways on the
general budget in the current year is expected to be around Rs.109 crores
17. In order to meet the additional and inescapable demands on the Central
Budget, and to contain the deficit to the minimum, Government had made serious
efforts both to tap additional resources and to restrict expenditures. The net market
borrowing by the Centre this, year will amount to Rs.472 crores, as against the Budget
provision of Rs.326 crores. The expenditure requirements of the various Ministries
were carefully reviewed and savings were located in their administrative and other
non-developmental expenditure. In view of the difficult resource position, a review of
the Plan outlays was also undertaken, particularly in regard to schemes which were
not vital to the core of the Plan.
4

18. Despite all these efforts, the year-end deficit will be of the order of Rs.650
crores. We are deeply concerned about the deleterious effects of deficit financing. But
no Government can overlook its obligation to alleviate the hardships and sufferings of
large sections of the people. It is this obligation that has rendered a larger deficit
inescapable.
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1974-75
19. The next financial year is the first year of the Fifth Plan. A significant
step-up in the rate of investment is clearly an essential condition for the realisation of
basic objectives of the Plan. At the same time, the general economic situation renders
the task of raising the needed financial resources more difficult. The sharp rise in
prices in the last two years has greatly increased non-developmental expenditure,
particularly on pay and allowances, thereby reducing the surpluses for development.
In addition, the continued sluggishness of industrial production has affected the growth
of revenues. In framing the budget for 1974-75, we also have to take into account the
likely impact of the oil crisis and very high prices of many imported commodities on
the country’s balance of payments, the pattern of imports, and the growth of agricultural
and industrial output on government revenues. I would be the last to deny that there
are many sources of uncertainty and anxiety in the present situation. Nevertheless, I
am convinced that a legitimate concern with our immediate problems must not lead to
a neglect of our long-term growth objectives. That would be a self-defeating exercise.
In my view, recent events have only further vindicated the soundness of a development
strategy which must succeed in strengthening the country’s industrial and energy base.
20. The Budget for 1974-75 provides for a total outlay of Rs.2966 crores for
the Plan. Out of this Rs.911 crores have been provided as assistance to State and
Union Territories Plan, while the provision for the Central Plan is Rs.2055 crores.
This provision represents a difficult compromise between two conflicting
considerations, namely to keep deficit financing to the minimum and to keep the
wheels of production moving. Particular care has been taken to make adequate provision
for such industrial and agricultural schemes and projects as are essential for the future
growth of the economy, and are likely to be completed in the first two years of the
Fifth Plan, so that the economy derives the benefits from investments early enough in
the Plan period.
21. The role of coal as the most important source of commercial energy has
been underlined by the current shortage of oil and the resultant energy crisis. The
development of coal has, therefore, been accorded very high priority in the budget for
1974-75. Rs.97 crores have been earmarked for this purpose. In other words the outlay
on coal has been increased four times as compared to the provision of Re. 24 crores
last year. Later in my speech, I shall outline certain fiscal measures which are designed
to encourage industry to switch over, as early as possible, from the use of oil to coal
as a source of energy.
5

22. No less critical is the role of steel in our economic development. The
availability of steel has a major influence not only on the pace of industrial development,
bit also on the viability of our international payments. For all these reasons, the
budgetary provision for steel production has been fixed at Rs.162 crores. If one adds
to this figure the internal resources available the total figure amounts to Rs.276 crores,
which is Rs.75 crores more than the total of Rs.201 crores available this year.
23. In order to reduce the country’s acute dependence on imported supplies of
non-ferrous metals it is also necessary to push ahead with the development of domestic
resources as fast as we can. Accordingly, a provision of Rs.75 crores is being made in
the budget for 1974-75 for the development of this vital sector. This is against Rs.56
crores provided this year.
24. In view of the predominant role the railways play in our transport economy
we have ensured that adequate finances are provided for the development of railways.
As Honourable members are aware, the railways have run into serious financial
difficulties and their own resources may not be sufficient to finance a Plan of an order
which will meet the requirements of our economy. I have, therefore, considerably
stepped -up the budgetary support for the Railways to Rs.342 crores next year, as
against Rs.181 crores in the current year.
25. Power is a vital input for both industry and agriculture. The power shortages
that developed during recent years have had a crippling effect on the economy and
have highlighted the urgent need for augmenting our generating capacity and improving
the operational performance of existing plants. The Fifth Plan envisages that installed
capacity of power generation will be stepped up to 33 million k.w. by the end of the
Plan. The strategy is to expedite the completion of projects which are already under
construction, and to go in for new thermal schemes which have short gestation periods.
The importance of rural electrification in developing the rural economy can hardly be
over-emphasised. Though many of the rural electrification schemes fall in the State
Plan sector, as a special case, I am providing Rs.40 crores for the Rural Electrification
Corporation over and above Rs.790 crores of assistance provided ‘to States for their
Plan. The total budgetary provision for power in the Central Budget during 1974-75
will be Rs.121 crores.
26. Considering the current shortage of fertilizers and difficulties in procuring
these from abroad, the thrust of next year’s Plan will be to maximise production from
installed capacity and to speed up the implementation of projects already under way.
The budget provides Rs.163 crores for this sector as against Rs.94 crores in the current
year which is a substantial increase.
27. While every effort has been ‘made to provide resources to stimulate
industrial production, the requirements of the agricultural sector have not been ignored.
We are providing Rs.246 crores as budgetary support for agricultural programmes.
The behaviour of agriculture has a crucial impact on the growth of national income,
6

prices, industrial production, balance of payments and the distribution of income.
Accordingly~ shall not allow paucity of resources to stand in the way of maximising
our agricultural output. Honourable Members will be happy to note that various
agricultural schemes which we have undertaken in the last few years such as schemes
for small and marginal farmers, tribal development, development of hill areas, provision
of institutional credits, drought-prone areas programmes, and the applied nutrition
programme are making satisfactory progress.
28. Within the overall constraints of resources, and after meeting the minimum
needs of the core sectors of development I have attempted to provide as large funds as
possible for social services like education, health, family planning, social welfare and
housing. The provisions made in earlier Plans for meeting minimum essential needs
for social consumption did not achieve the desired results, mainly because related
programmes were not given due priority, and an effective integration of facilities was
not attempted. Honourable Members are aware that the draft Fifth Plan has provided
for a National Programme of Minimum Needs to achieve a certain minimum level of
social consumption in the form of elementary education, rural health, drinking water,
provision for slum clearance, rural roads and rural electrification. I hope that the State
Governments will be able to ensure effective utilisation of the resources allocated for
this programme.
29. The total provision for the Central Plan in the Budget inclusive of Union
Territory Plan of Rs.81 crores will amount to Rs.2136 crores excluding Central
assistance of Rs.830 crores for the Plans of the States. In addition, extra budgetary
resources for financing the Central Plan will amount to Rs.574 crores. The resources
for State Plans for 1974-75 will be of the order of Rs.2059 crores. Thus, the total
Plan outlay during 1974-75 will amount to Rs.4769 crores as against Rs.4364 crores
in 1973 -74.
30. We have decided in favour of a larger Plan outlay to enable us to move
faster towards the twin objectives of removal of poverty and attainment of economic
self-reliance. I am however convinced that Plan investments can yield benefits on the
scale anticipated only if the Plan is implemented efficiently and all the participants in
the productive process-management and labour-accept the larger obligations they owe
to the community. Maintenance of satisfactory industrial relations particularly in key
sectors is absolutely essential if the Plan targets are to be achieved. Monetary and
fiscal policies should also be directed towards the achievement of Plan objectives.
These policies will have to be supplemented by the adoption of effective management
techniques in the allocation of resources, proper selection and phasing of projects and
programmes and close monitoring of programmes. The productivity of public
expenditure programmes can be enhanced considerably if continuous attention is paid
to the flow of expenditure so that appropriate corrective action is taken well in time to
ensure that the benefits expected are fully realised. This can be achieved only if
financial control and management accounting functions are, dovetailed with the7

responsibility for execution of programmes. We are, therefore, contemplating some
structural changes in the financial management system so as to match the authority for
taking decisions with the responsibility for producing results.
31. The new accounting classification prescribed by the Comptroller and
Auditor General relfects more meaningfully the functions, programmes and activities
of the Government. The Budget is framed on the basis of this new classification. With
this, Performance Budgeting, which is already in vogue, will, I believe, receive a
further impetus and it will be made an effective instrument to measure the efficacy of
the allocation of resources and the returns there from.
32. The outlay on Defence has been provided at Rs.1915 crores which includes
the provision for additional funds required on account of the acceptance of the
recommendations of the Third Pay Commission. Keeping in view the large requirements
of national defence and security, the provision for Defence could not possibly be kept
at any lower level.
33. On the side of resources, we have to reckon with the likely adverse impact
of the energy crisis on revenues, though it is difficult to estimate the impact at this
stage with any degree of certainly. As an allowance for this factor, we have assumed
some deceleration in the growth of revenues from excise and customs. Together, these
two sources are expected to yield Rs.3769 crores in 1974-75 as compared to Rs.3608
crores in 1973-74 according to the revised estimates. The estimated yield from direct
taxes is Rs.1423 crores as against Rs.1354 crores in 1973-74 revised estimates.
34. The progress in small savings collections is gratifying and estimates for
1974-75 are placed at Rs.360 crores. The estimated net receipts from market borrowings
at Rs.498 crores also show a marginal improvement over 1973-74.
35. Taking into account all the provisions for expenditure and the estimates
of resources, the budgetary gap at existing rates of taxes will amount to Rs.311 crores.
The House will naturally be anxious to know as to how I propose to meet this gap. I
now turn to this task.

PART B
DIRECT TAXES
36. I come first to the proposals in the field of direct taxes. As Honourable
Members are aware, the Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee has made a number of
recommendations in regard to direct taxes. Several of these recommendations have
already been implemented. Provisions to give effect to some other recommendations
are included in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1973 which is at present before
8

a Select Committee of this House. One of the important recommendations of the
Committee relates to reduction in the rates of taxes. The Committee has expressed the
view that prevalence of high rates is the first and foremost reason for tax evasion,
because this is what makes the evasion, in spite of attendant risks, profitable and
attractive. The Committee has, accordingly, recommended that the maximum marginal
rate of income-tax, including surcharge, should be brought down from its present
level of 97.75 per cent to 75 per cent. Simultaneously, there should be a reduction in
tax rates at the middle and lower levels. This recommendation of the Committee has
been accepted by Government with minor modifications. I, accordingly propose to
lower taxes at all levels of personal incomes. Under the proposed rate schedules, no
income-tax will be payable by individuals or Hindu undivided families having income
not exceeding Rs.6,000. The marginal rate of basic income-tax will stand at 70 per
cent on the income in the slab over Rs.70,000. In the case of Hindu undivided families
having at least one member with an independent total income exceeding the minimum
exemption limit, the marginal rate of 70 per cent will be attracted at income levels
over Rs.50,000. The rate of surcharge will be reduced to a uniform level of 10 per cent
in the case of all categories of non-corporate taxpayers. The combined incidence of
income-tax and surcharge, in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families,
will stand at 77 per cent of the taxable income in the highest slab.
37. In view of the reduction in taxes on personal incomes, I do not think it is
necessary to continue the preferential tax treatment in respect of incomes derived by
non-corporate taxpayers through providing technical ‘know-how’ and technical services
to Indian or foreign enterprises. I, accordingly, propose to withdraw the existing
concession in this regard.
38. In order to ensure that the effectiveness of the fiscal instrument for reducing
disparities in incomes and wealth is not impaired, I propose to increase the rates of
wealth-tax on the slabs of net wealth over R8.5,00,000 in the case of individuals and
Hindu undivided families, where no member has net wealth exceeding Rs.1,00,000.
The rate of wealth-tax on the slab of Rs.5,00,001 to Rs.10,00,000 will be increased
from 2 per cent to 3 per cent, and on the slab of Rs.10,00,001 to Rs.15,00,000 from 3
per cent to 4 per cent. In the case of Hindu undivided families having at least one
member with net wealth exceeding Rs.1,00,000, the rate of wealth-tax on the first slab
of Rs.5,00,000 will be raised from 2 per cent to 3 per cent and on the slab of Rs.5,00,001
to Rs.10,00,000 from 3 per cent to 4 per cent.
39. I also propose to rationalise some of the exemptions available at present
under the Wealth tax Act. I propose to withdraw the separate exemption in respect of
farm houses. Tax payers will, however, have the option to claim exemption in respect
of one farm house, or one other house property within the existing limit of Rs.1, 00,
000. Exemption in respect of agricultural land will be linked with the exemption in
respect of specified financial assets, so that the total exemption in respect of agricultural
land and specified financial assets will be limited to Rs.1,50,000. At present, the value
9

of the taxpayer’s interest in insurance policies before their maturity is completely
exempt from wealth-tax. A similar exemption is also available in respect of the
taxpayer’s right in any annuity which is not commutable into a lump sum grant. These
exemptions have been exploited by certain individuals by taking out single premium
policies of very large amounts. I propose to modify these provisions so that complete
exemption will be available in respect of insurance monies only where premia have
been paid over a period of 10 years or more. As regards annuities, I propose to withdraw
the exemption in respect of non-commutable annuities if such annuities have been
purchased by the taxpayer himself, or by any other person in pursuance of a contract
with him.
40. The changes in the Wealth-tax Act will yield about Rs.9.5 crores in a full
year, which will accrue in the financial year 1975-76. The reduction in the rates of
income-tax on personal incomes would ordinarily have resulted in a loss of about
Rs.60 crores in a full year and Rs.36 crores in the financial year 1974-75. I am,
however, not taking any loss into account for budgetary purposes as I expect that the
reduction in the rates of taxes will lead to better tax compliance, and full disclosures
of incomes by all taxpayers.
41. In the case of registered firms, two surcharges are presently levied. I
propose to merge the ordinary surcharge payable by such firms with the basic incometax, and specify only one surcharge at the uniform rate of 10 per cent. In order to
retain the liability in respect of basic income tax in the case of professional firms as
well as other firms at more or less the existing levels, I propose to prescribe two
separate rate schedules in the case of such firms.
42. In my budget speech for 1971-72, I gave notice of Government’s intention
to withdraw the development rebate in respect of ships acquired or machinery and
plant installed after May 31, 1974. It now appears that industry has in some cases not
been able to secure timely delivery of plant and machinery both from foreign and
indigenous manufacturers which has caused a setback to the timely completion of
some of the industrial projects which would in the normal course have been completed
before May 31, 1974. Several unforeseen factors are responsible for this, such as
uncertainty prevailing in the international market, dependence of indigenous
manufacturers on imports in respect of critical parts or raw materials, difficulties in
the availability of shipping space, power shortage, etc. Relief is deserved in such
cases, and I propose to extend the operation of the development rebate by one year in
cases where there is conclusive evidence to show that contracts for purchase of
machinery and plant were finalized before December 1, 1973. This extension will also
be available in respect of ships acquired up to May 31, 1975, if the contracts for
purchase were made before December 1, 1973.
43. The critical shortage of petroleum products has resulted in an unexpected
crisis as a result of which industry has to be encouraged to switch over to other
sources of energy. I, accordingly, propose to allow development rebate in respect of
10

coal-fired boilers or any machinery or plant for converting oil-fired boilers to coalfired boilers where these are installed before June 1, 1975.
44. In order to simplify the assessment procedure in the case of salaried
taxpayers, I propose to substitute the separate deductions in respect of traveling,
books, taxes on professions and expenditure incurred in the performance of duties
by a standard deduction up to a maximum of Rs.3, 500. Simultaneously I propose to
place the valuation of perquisites of employees on a more realistic basis, I also
propose to liberalise the tax treatment of retirement benefits in certain directions.
The retiring gratuities payable under the Payment of Gratuities Act, 1972 will be
completely exempt from income-tax. In the case of employees not covered by that
Act, the alternative ceiling limits on the exempted amount of gratuities will be
raised from Rs.24, 000 to Rs.30, 000 and from 15 months’ salary to 20 months’
salary.
45. In order to enable State Financial Corporations to build up reserves at an
accelerated pace, I propose to raise the ceiling limit in respect of amounts transferred
to tax exempt reserves to 40 per cent of the current profits.
46. There are a large number of public charitable trusts and -registered societies
engaged in the development of khadi and village industries. These trusts and societies
are doing commendable work under the direct supervision of the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission. I propose to exempt all such Institutions from income-tax
provided they are approved by the Khadi and Village Industries Commission.
47. As a result of the change in pricing policies, some of the industrial
companies are making windfall profits. I feel that the exchequer should also secure a
larger share of these profits. I, accordingly, propose to increase the rate of surtax from
30 per cent to 40 per cent in respect of chargeable profits of companies exceeding 15
per cent of the capital. This measure will yield Rs.5 crores in a full year and this will
accrue in 1975-76.
48. To sum up, in the field of direct taxes no effect is expected on tax revenues
during the next financial year as a result of the proposals outlined by me. In the
financial year 1975-76, there will be an addition of Rs.14.5 crores as a result of these
changes.
INDIRECT TAXES
49. Sir, I will now move on to the proposals relating to indirect taxes.
50. As in the past, I have necessarily to rely more heavily on indirect taxes,
particularly excise duties. The scope for raising resources from other measures having
become severely limited, the choice before me has really been between raising indirect
taxes and resorting to deficit financing and the former, I feel, is the better alternative.
11

EXCISE DUTIES
51. Taking up Central Excises, I shall first deal with some important measures
for raising resources exclusively for the Centre. Honourable Members are aware that
a new provision was made last year for levying auxiliary duties of excise on all
excisable goods at an amount equal to 20 per cent of the value of the goods. These
levies were restricted to certain selected items at a level needed to meet the demands
of the Centre then. I propose to continue this provision for another year. While the
effective levies on the items chosen last year will remain unchanged, I propose to add
selectively some more to the list.
52. Briefly, my proposal is to levy auxiliary duties at the rate of ten per cent
of the effective basic duty on un-manufactured tobacco, cigarettes, smoking mixtures,
plywood and cement; at the rate of twenty per cent of the effective basic duty on
dyestuffs, optical bleaching agents, gases, rubber products and plastics; at the rate of
thirty-three and one-third per cent of the effective basic duty on paints and varnishes;
and at the rate of fifty per cent of the effective basic duty on aerated waters, glycerine,
cosmetics and toilet preparations. Through these proposals and as a result of the
modifications of the basic excise duties I am proposing on the existing items, I expect
to raise Rs.62.38 crores in a year, by way of auxiliary duties.
53. In the case of steel as well as other metals, the auxiliary duties are proposed
to be applied only to indigenous production and will not be attracted by way of
countervailing duty on imports, as hithereto. I propose to extend a similar exemption
in the case of plastics.
54. In the sphere of basic excise duties, my proposals naturally cover a wider
range and have been made with the multiple objects of rationalisation, curbing
consumption, mopping up fortuitous gains and, not the least important, I must confess,
raising revenue. In November, 1973, following successive increases in crude oil prices
and cuts in crude oil supplies, and as one of a series of measures, the basic excise duty
on motor spirit was raised from Rs.1000 per kilolitre to Rs.2000 per kilolitre. In view
of the continuing need for exercising restraint and economy in the consumption of a
number of other petroleum products, and to prevent their misuse, I propose to increase
substantially the basic excise duties in respect of “special boiling point” spirits, raw
naphtha intended for methanol and petro-chemicals, benzene etc. used for a variety of
purposes, asphalt and bitumen, mineral turpentine oil, waxes and blended or
compounded lubricating oils and greases. Through these proposals, I expect to raise
an additional revenue of Rs.22.48 crores from the petroleum group.
55. The rates of excise duty on various types of motor vehicles have remained
unchanged for some years now. I, therefore, propose to rationalise the rates of duty
by replacing the existing alternative rates by ad valorem rates. I intend imposing a
uniform rate of 9 per cent ad valorem on vehicles like scooters, motor-cycles, mopeds,
auto-rickshaws and other three-wheelers. Motor vehicles of not more than 16 H.P.
12

by R.A.C. rating, which cover passenger-cars, jeeps, etc., are at present assessable
at a rate of duty of 13.33% ad valorem. I propose to increase this rate to 20% ad
valorem in respect of vehicles with body and to 25% ad valorem in respect of
others, including those cleared as drive-away chassis. Big-sized cars will pay a
higher duty at 40% ad valorem.
56. Commercial Vehicles have had the benefit of concessional ‘specific’ rates
fixed some years ago. I propose to discontinue these and impose a uniform ad valorem
rate of 121/2 per cent. In that process, certain extra-heavy vehicles, which are at present
paying duty at the tariff rate, will get an incidental benefit of 21/2 per cent. I do not,
however, propose to change the existing rates on tractors and trailers.
57. The proposals relating to motor vehicles are estimated to net an additional
revenue of Rs.16.25 crores.
58. As part of the socio-economic objectives of the Government, I have some
proposals to restrain consumption by the more affluent section of the community. The
existing rates of duty on refrigerators, air-conditioners, refrigerating and air-conditioning
machinery, appliances, and parts, are being stepped up, with certain modifications in
respect of a few existing exemptions. The present concessional rates in favour of
public-run hospitals, cold-storage plants and factory establishments are not, however,
being disturbed. These changes are expected to bring in additional revenue of Re.5
crores in a year.
59. Some of the manufacturers of T.V. sets have been regaling us with
advertisements exhorting the public to “budget for a T.V. set to forestall the Central
Government Budget. As a compliment to these soothsayers on the accuracy of their
prediction, I propose to increase the duty on T.V. sets from 10 per cent ad valorem to
20 per cent ad valorem. Extended play records are also being brought within the
dutiable category. While these proposals will make entertainment costlier for the
wealthy, I am anxious that music, entertainment and knowledge should reach the less
privileged in wider measure at lesser cost. To this end, I propose to exempt totally all
radio-sets produced in the small scale sector and sold to the consumer at a price of not
more than Rs.225 per set. These measures are estimated to bring in a net revenue of
Rs.1.20 crores.
60. I have been avoiding major changes in the rates of duties on various
cotton textiles, including cotton yarn, except to the limited extent of raising resources
for the States. The rates of duty are ‘specific’ and were fixed in 1969 at a time when
the industry was beset with difficulties. There is, therefore, a clear need for revision,
especially as the industry has since recovered. Cotton textiles being an item of mass
consumption, I am quite alive to the need for forbearance in increasing the rates of
duty on certain categories of yarn and fabrics. My proposals, therefore, cover only
superfine, fine and medium-A fabrics, which are subjected to sophisticated processes,
such as, mercerising/shrink-proofing/sanforizing. In the case of cotton yarn, the
13

escalations are confined to higher count groups. I have, however, not disturbed the
existing exemptions and concessional rates in respect of yam in straight- reeled hanks
mostly consumed by the handloom sector. I have also rationalised certain exemptions
and compounded levy rates. These measures relating to cotton yarn and cotton fabrics
are estimated to yield an additional revenue of Rs.22.05 crores.
61. As a measure of rationalisation, which will also earn revenue, I propose
to increase the existing two rates of duty on polyester fibre to a uniform rate of Rs.40
per kilogram. Suitable in creases in the existing rates applicable to different denier
groups of polyester filament yarn, sympathetic revisions in the rates of duty on staple
fibre spun yam, certain categories of blended yam, and an increase in the rate of duty
on resin-bonded slagwool, are also being proposed. These proposals would bring in an
additional revenue yield of Rs.13.99 crores.
62. In regard to iron or steel, I propose to rationalise certain exemptions relating
to pig iron. steel ingots and products produced with the aid of electric furnace, and to
products made out of duty paid cut-pieces of steel ingots, which will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.7.20 crores.
63. The rates of duty for various categories of paper and board are ‘specific’
and require review from time to time. I propose to make suitable upward revisions in
the existing rates on paper and paper board, apart from rationalising certain exemptions
and classifications. The concessional rate of 15 paise per kilogram applicable to the
commoner varieties of printing and writing paper falling within the grammage limit
not exceeding 65 grammes per square metre, the total exemption in favour of newsprint,
hand-made paper and board, as well as existing concessions for smaller paper mills
and newly established units, will, however, continue. These measures will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.10 crores.
64. As straight revenue-raising measures, I propose to increase by 5 per cent
ad valorem the existing rates of duty an surface active agents, office machines, metal
containers, rolling bearings, welding electrodes, coated abrasives and grinding wheels,
dry batteries, certain categories of glass and glassware, chinaware and porcelainware
and thereby raise an additional revenue of Rs.20.17 crores.
65. As a part of our efforts to mobilise resources, I propose to levy for the
first time excise duties at varying rates an tooth-paste (including dental cream), electrical
stampings and laminations, specified cutting tools, tape and cassette recorders, castalloy permanent magnets and sensitised photographic paper and board. In the matter
of new levies, Members will be reassured to know that suitable exemptions for smaller
manufacturers have been provided wherever necessary. These new levies would bring
in an-additional revenue of Rs.8.20 crores.
66. Some minor proposals for changes in excise duty will yield an additional
Rs.3.05 crores. The proposals relating to excise duties account for a net gain in revenue
14

of Rs.191.97 crores in 1974-75, of which Rs.25.92 crores will accrue to the States and
Rs.166.05 crores to the Centre.
Customs Duties
67. In the matter of customs duties, in view of the mounting world-wide
shortages and unprecedented rise in international prices of a wide array of imported
goods, my proposals in regard to import duties are no more than marginal. Briefly, I
propose to continue for another year the auxiliary duties of customs and the exemptions
relating to them, with a slight modification. At present, these duties are levied at three
differential rates of 20%, 10% and 5%. I propose to raise the rate applicable to the
middle slab from 10% to 15%. This modification will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.16 crores in a full year.
68. The only other proposal I have to make concerns whisky, brandy, gin and
certain other spirits by way of an increase in the basic duty from Rs.60 per litre to
Rs.80 per litre. While society at higher levels may, as a result, have to pay a little more
for their’ spirituous relaxation, it will help me in getting some revenue for the exchequer.
69. Inclusive of additional duties, consequential to the changes in excise duties,
the additional revenue from import duties will amount to Rs.20.05 crores annually.
70. Taking Customs and Central Excise duties together and exclusive of States’
share, the additional revenue accruing to the Centre will be of the order of Rs.186. 10
crores in a full year.
Posts and Telegraphs
71. I need now to say a word on behalf of my colleague the Minister Of
Communications. As the House is aware, postal rates have not kept pace with rising
costs. The frequent increases in Dearness Allowance and the heavy additional
expenditure incurred on account of implementation of the Pay Commission’s
recommendations have further pushed up the establishment cost in the Postal Branch
which is highly labour oriented. On the Telecommunications side, also, the operational
costs as well as the cost of equipment required for various projects have been going
up steadily. The Department’s developmental programme to improve the Trunk
Telephone Service by provision of high grade media like Microwave and Co-axial
systems, to install new Exchanges and expand existing ones for meeting the fast growing
demand for telephone connections and to expand the Trunk Dialling and Teleprinter
facilities all entail heavy investments. These various factors necessitate an upward
revision of tariffs in the Postal, Telegraph and Telephone Branches of the Department.
A Memorandum showing the proposed changes in the Posts and Telegraphs Tariffs is
being circulated along with Budget papers. I shall therefore mention only the more
important changes.
15

72. The tariff for Postcards is proposed to be increased from 10 Paise to 15
Paise. Even after this revision, the Department will be incurring a loss of Rs.2.43
crores per annurn in running this service. It is proposed to raise the rate of Letter cards
from 15 Paise to 20 Paise and that of Letters weighing upto 15 grams from 20 Paise
to 25 Paise. The Registration Fee is being increased from Re.1/- to Rs.1.25 and the
Parcel rate from Re.1/- for every 400 grams to Rs.1.50 for every 500 grams. The
Posting Fee for Value Payable Post and the tariff for Business Reply Permits are being
revised. The minimum charge for a Non-Press Telegram of ‘Ordinary’ category with
eight words or less is being increased from Rs.1. 20 to Rs.1.50 and for the `Express’
category from Rs.2.40 to Rs.3.00. The charge for each additional word will, however,
remain the same. It is also proposed to increase the rental for telephone connection
both in the ‘measured rate systems’ and the ‘flat rate systems’. As against this, the
number of free calls allowed during a quarter will be raised from 250 to 300. The rate
for each additional call after 300 will be increased from 20 paise to 25 Paise. The
Trunk Call rate structure is being rationalized. While this will involve increase in
Trunk Call charges for distances between 100 and 1300 kilometers, in respect of calls
between stations within 20 kilometers, only the unit fee of 25 Paise will be charged
for an ‘ordinary’ call as against the present 50 Paise for such calls.
73. These tariff revisions are estimated to bring in additional revenue of
Rs.57.08 crores per annum. The changes would be given effect to from dates to be
notified after the Finance Bill is passed by Parliament. The yield during the financial
year 1974-75 will be of the order of Rs.42.80 crores.
74. The results of these changes have been accounted for in reckoning the
internal resources of Posts and Telegraphs Department.
75. So far as the Union Budget is concerned, the various proposals would
imply, for 1974-75 additional revenue aggregating Rs.186 crores. The budgetary
gap of Rs.311 crores I had indicated earlier will accordingly be now scaled down to
Rs.125 crores.
76. In conclusion, I would like once again to draw the attention of the House
to the developments of last two years which have shown how certain events can
greatly upset the original budgetary calculations. In the year ahead lie more sources of
uncertainty than ever before, which must be tackled speedily and with flexibility. I
would, however, like to say that we do not propose to allow these uncertainties to blur
our vision of the future. The social and economic problems that we currently face can
be resolved in the long run only in the frame-work of a rapidly expanding economy
with socialist objectives. I trust this budget is one more step in that direction.
(February 28, 1974)

16

