SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R. DESAI MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1959-60

Sir,
I rise to present the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Government of India for the year 1959-60.
2.
A detailed review of the major developments in the economy during the
year now drawing to a close and an assessment of the emerging trends is given in the
Economic Survey which is being circulated along with the budget papers. I shall
confine myself to a brief review of the economic situation and draw the attention of
the House to those of the important aspects of the situation that merit special attention.
3.
The drop in agricultural production last year, which was the lowest in
record since 1953-54, affected the availability of foodgrains and other agricultural
products during the current year. The rate of growth of industrial production also
slowed down while prices showed an upward trend through a major part of the year.
There was continuing pressure on the balance of payments in the first half of the year.
The situation has eased somewhat in recent months. The kharif crop has been good
and the prospects of the rabi appear to be fair. There has been some fall in prices and
the decline in foreign exchange reserves has been halted; indeed there have been
small accretions to these reserves in recent weeks but the overall shortage still remains.
The requirements of foreign exchange for the remaining period of the Plan are sizeable
and the current account in the balance of payments is likely to show continuing deficits.
On the whole the economic situation is somewhat better than it was a few months ago;
we are sensing the effect of the various corrective measures we have taken.
PRODUCTION
4.
Agricultural production this year is, as I have just said, expected to be
distinctly better both in regard to foodcrops and commercial crops. Industrial production
also increased during the year but at a somewhat lower rate than in 1957. In some
industries such as cotton textiles, finished steel, automobiles, power transformers and
vanaspati, there was, however a decline in output. The production of mill cloth, in
particular, showed & sharp drop, the output declining from 5,317 million yards in
1957 to 4,900 million yards in 1958. Some industries have been handicapped by
restrictions arising out of the current shortage of foreign exchange. On the other hand,
there have been significant increases in production in a wide range of industries such
as coal, pig iron, diesel engines, electricity, machine tools, newsprint and a number of
chemical and engineering industries. These increases have been made possible partly
by the better utilisation of existing capacity and partly by increases in capacity resulting
1

from the expansion programme undertaken earlier. Among the industries whose capacity
increased in 1958 may be mentioned cement, caustic soda, sulphuric acid, super
phosphates, oxygen gas and refractories. In the public sector the steel programme is
proceeding more or less according to schedule. A significant step was taken during the
year in the manufacture of heavy machinery in the country by the formation of the
Heavy Engineering Corporation which will set up a heavy foundry, a forge, a heavy
machine building shop and a factory for the manufacture of mining machinery.
Construction of the plant at Bhopal for the manufacture of heavy electrical goods is
also proceeding apace.
MONETARY TRENDS
5.
A significant feature in the monetary situation during the year was the
decline in the rate of increase in the money supply. The expansionary impact of
Government transactions on the economy was mitigated by the contractionist effect of
a decline in the foreign exchange reserves and a fall in the indebtedness of the private
sector to the banking system. While in 1956 the increase in the money supply was
Rs.131.5 crores and in 1957 Rs.96.3 crores, it dropped to Rs.74.9 crores in 1958.
Deposits with the banks continued to increase but the expansion of bank credit has
been relatively smaller. Banks have, therefore, been able to reduce their credit deposit
ratio, from 62.7 per cent at the end of 1957 to 55 per cent at the end of 1958. Borrowings
of scheduled banks from the Reserve Bank have gone down while there has been
substantial increase in the holding of Government securities by the Banking system.
Easy conditions prevailed in the money market until almost the end of 1958 when the
onset of the busy season led to a hardening of interest rates.
6.
The stock markets have shown a marked improvement as compared with
the previous year. The index of variable dividend industrial securities rose from 120
at the end of 1957 to 145 by the end of September 1958. There has been some decline
since then but, over the year as a whole, it has registered an improvement of about 14
per cent Prices of securities have remained fairly firm despite large borrowings both
by the Centre and the States.
PRICES
7.
The index of wholesale prices has risen from about 106 a year ago to 112
or so, the peak level of 116.5 having been reached last September. This rise in the
wholesale index largely reflects the increase in the prices of foodgrains consequent on
the shortfall in production. The index of prices of cereals rose from 98 in December,
1957 to 105 in December 1958 and the food articles from 104 to 113 over the same
period. The other components of the wholesale price index, such as industrial raw
materials and manufactures have remained practically steady. The working class cost
of living index (all India) rose from 113 in December 1957 to 122 in November 1958
but declined to 119 in the following month with food items coming down. The price
indices in the current year are, to some extent, distorted by the rise in food prices due
largely to the poor crop of the previous year.
2

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
8.
I shall now give a brief account of the balance of payments position of the
country and of the steps taken to ease the difficulties which we have been facing since
the beginning of the Second Plan. It is not necessary for me to give more than a
factual account of the recent developments because this problem which has been
engaging the continuous attention of Government has been considered by Parliament
more than once in some detail. From almost the commencement of the Second Plan,
we have been drawing rather heavily on our reserves and between April 1956 and
February 1959 they dropped by Rs.535 crores, from Rs.746 crores to Rs.211 crores,
despite substantial foreign assistance and drawals from the International Monetary
Fund. The reasons for this are well known. The decline was very largely due to larger
imports, in the main, of plant, machinery and industrial raw materials for development,
though imports of foodgrains and Defence equipment and the decline in export: earnings
also contributed to it. A number of measures were taken to cut down foreign expenditure
to the minimum necessary to maintain the economy and implement the projects in the
‘core’ of the Plan and to promote exports under difficult trading conditions in the
world as a whole. As a result of these measures and the arrangements made to obtain
credits and loans from friendly foreign countries and the World Bank, the rate of
drawals from the reserves declined appreciably from the third quarter of 1957-58. The
average monthly drawal was Rs.23. 3 crores in 1956-57 and Rs.34.7 crores during the
first half of 1957-58; in the following six months the rate of drawal dropped to Rs.14.2
crores a month. There has been a further improvement since then. During the first six
months of the current financial year the reserves have fallen at a monthly rate of
Rs.13.9 crores. In the third quarter there has been a slight increase in the balances.
Ignoring fluctuations our reserves have more or less maintained their level in the last
six months.
9.
The year 1957-58 ended with a current account balance of payments deficit
of RS.451 crores. The payments deficit during each of the 4 quarters of the year was
Rs.150 crores, Rs.148 crores, Rs.72 crores and Rs.81 crores, respectively. Imports
during the year reached a record level of Rs.1,175 crores, showing an increase of
Rs.79 crores over the previous year. This increase in imports, despite the efforts to
conserve foreign exchange, partly reflects the heavy backlog of past commitments
which came in for payment during the year and partly the massive import required for
implementing the core of the Plan. The year witnessed larger imports on Government
account, which rose from Rs.201.5 crores in 1956-57 to Rs.492.8 crores in 1957-58.
Private imports during the year declined by Rs.122.3 crores to Rs.682 crores as a
result of the strict import control measures adopted since the beginning of 1957. Total
exports during the year amounted to Rs.594.5 crores, about Rs.40 crores less than in
1956-57. A general weakening of foreign demand and a fall in the prices of primary
commodities in foreign countries account for this decline.
3

10. The adverse trend in the country’s balance of payments has continued in
1958-59. During the first two quarters of the year the payments deficit on current
account was of the order of Rs.120 crores and Rs.91 crores respectively. As against a
total deficit of Rs.210.8 crores on current account during the first half of 1958-59, the
foreign exchange reserves fell by Rs.86.3 crores; the balance was made up by foreign
loans and credits and other capital transactions.
11. In recent months the Sterling Area, of which India is a member has grown
further in strength and its gold and dollar reserves rose to $3215 million at the end of
November, 1958 - the highest level attained since September, 1951. During December,
1958 the reserve declined by $146 million to $3069 million but this was due to the
payment of $196 million on account of end year service on the U.S. and Canadian
loans, but for which there would have been a small rise in the reserve. As the House
is aware, some of the West European countries, including the United Kingdom,
announced further relaxation of restrictions on convertibility of their currencies with
effect from December 29, 1958. From that date sterling held or acquired by nonresidents of the Sterling Area has become freely transferable at the official rate of
exchange. Honourable Members will recall that, at the Commonwealth Trade and
Economic Conference held at Montreal in September, we, in common with other
participating countries, had affirmed that it remained our objective to work for full
sterling convertibility as soon as the necessary conditions can be achieved.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
12. In the statement I made in this House on November 19, 1958, I had referred
to the conference convened by the World Bank in August, 1958 to discuss India’s
foreign exchange situation and the manner in which India could be helped. Following
the conference, the participating countries and the World Bank announced their intention
to provide further assistance to India totalling $ 360 million (Rs.171.4 crores) during
the current financial year. Canada would give a grant equivalent to seventeen million
dollars, West Germany a loan equivalent to forty million dollars, Japan a loan equivalent
to ten million dollars, the United Kingdom an advance payment under the pension
settlement of ten million pounds and a loan of £ 28.5 millions, the United States a loan
of $100 million from the Development Loan Fund and the World Bank a loan of $ 85
million for the Railways. The procedure for operating the above loans and grant have
since been settled and agreements signed with the countries concerned where necessary.
13. During the current financial year, the World Bank sanctioned four loans
aggregating $ 153 million (Rs.72.9 crores) for the development of the Calcutta Port,
the Madras Port, the third D.V.C Project and the third Railway Development
Programme. The World Bank has played a most helpful role both by sanctioning loans
for individual development projects and by mobilising a cooperative effort by some of
its member countries to help us meet our essential foreign exchange requirements.
The Bank proposes to convene another similar conference next month to explore how
4

India could be helped in meeting her foreign exchange requirements for the next two
years of the Plan. It is expected that negotiations with the World Bank for further
loans for the Royna Project and the Railway development programme will take place
in the near future.
14. An important outcome of the last annual meeting of the Boards of
Governors of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development was the decision to increase the resources of these
institutions. A general fifty per cent increase in the quotas of members of the Fund has
been made with special ad hoc increases in the quotas of some of the members whose
currencies it will be advantageous for the Fund to hold in larger amounts. Our quota
in the Fund will be raised from $ 400 million to $ 600 million. We have to pay a fourth
of this increase in the form of gold and the balance in rupee securities and necessary
provision is being made in the budget for this purpose. So far as the World Bank is
concerned, it is raising its capital stock by $ 10 billion and its authorised capital by $
1 billion. Our subscription will be raised from $ 400 million to $ 800 million, but this
will not involve any payment on our part as the general increase in members subscription
is to remain ‘uncalled’, the object of the increase in capital stock being only to enhance
the borrowing power of the Bank.
15. I referred earlier to the assistance provided by the countries which
participated in the conference sponsored by the World Bank last August. In addition to
this assistance we have also received in the current year financial and technical
assistance from the United States, Colombo Plan countries and the Ford and Rockefeller
Foundations. Two agreements were signed this year with the United States Government
under the P.L. 480 program e for the import of foodgrains valued at about Rs.140
crores. This will raise the total amount of supplies under this programme to us to
about Rs.313 crores, of which Rs.183 crores will be made available to us as loans and
Rs.43 crores as grants, for expenditure on mutually agreed development projects. The
United States Government have also agreed to defer the payments due to them on the
1951 wheat loan for the next nine years giving us a relief of $7 million a year and to
give a loan of $20 million for the integrated project for export of iron ore to Japan, for
which the Japanese Government will provide a yen loan of $ 8 million for the
development of iron ore mines. Assistance has also been provided for the purchase of
fertilisers and tube well equipment abroad and for the eradication of malaria, aggregating
in all to $14.2 million. Canada has made a special grant of wheat worth $ 8 million
and sanctioned two loans amounting to $33 million for the purchase of wheat. Australia
and New Zealand have also continued their assistance.
16. Other friendly countries have also continued to help. Negotiations are in
progress with the U.S.S.R. who are already assisting us for the Bhilai Steel Plant and
for certain other industrial projects, for a credit for establishing a new project for
drugs. An agreement has been entered into with the Government of Rumania who will
5

provide machinery and technical skill costing about Rs.5.2 crores on deferred payment
for an oil refinery to be set up in Assam. The Government of Czechoslovakia have
also signed an agreement for establishing a forge foundry costing about Rs.8.5 crores.
17. I should like to express the gratitude of the Government of India to all the
countries and institutions which have given us economic assistance so valuable and
timely for our development.
18. We on our part have also continued our contribution of technical aid
under the Colombo Plan. Up to September 1958, we had arranged for the training of
1086 persons from the South and South East Asia Region. We made available seven
experts this year to Burma, Ceylon and Vietnam. We have continued to assist Nepal
and the expenditure incurred by us on development schemes to assist Nepal and the
provision of technical personnel to that country is expected to be Rs.1.38 crores this
year.
CHANGES IN THE BUDGET
19. Before I deal with the estimates of revenue and expenditure, I would like
to mention certain changes which have been made in the budget documents presented
to the House. For some years it has been the practice to present the Demands of
Defence Services and the Posts and Telegraphs Department in separate self-contained
publications. The question of extending this arrangement to other Ministries has been
under consideration for some time and, more recently, the Estimates Committee also
suggested that the estimates relating to individual Ministries should be presented in
self-contained volumes. This suggestion has been accepted and the Demands for Grants
for the budget year are being presented by individual Ministries to Parliament. Along
with the Demands for Grants, the notes on the expenditure estimates and on the
important schemes under the control of each Ministry will also appear together with
the accounts and balance sheets of industrial undertakings. The Explanatory
Memorandum on the Budget will now be confined to a general review of the revenue
and expenditure estimates and the Capital Budget and will contain various annexures
of general and financial interest dealing with the budget as a whole. Opportunity has
also been taken to transfer to the Economic Survey, presented along with the Budget,
data and statistics of economic interest which used to appear in the Explanatory
Memorandum. I am sure the House will welcome the revised arrangement which, for
the first time in the history of Government, will bring together for each Ministry the
estimates relating to it and will facilitate the disposal of these estimates by the House.
We are also giving, for the first time, the estimates relating to Plan expenditure
separately from the estimates on non-Plan items in the Demands for Grants. This
segregation of Plan expenditure in the Accounts and Estimates will, I feel, make for a
more efficient control of expenditure on the Plan. While making these changes, care
has been taken to see that, as far as possible, the material now available to Parliament
in the Hindi version of the Budget, is not curtailed in any way.
6

FINANCIAL YEAR 1958-59
20. Against the budgeted revenue of Rs.767.99 crores the actuals this year are
likely to amount to Rs.728.20 crores while the expenditure met from revenue is placed
at Rs.788.15 crores against the original estimate of Rs.796.01 crores. In the result the
deficit of Rs.28.02 crores provided in the Budget is likely to rise to Rs.59.95 crores.
21. The increase of Rs.31.93 crores in the revenue deficit for the year is
entirely due to a fall in the anticipated revenue, mostly in the revenue from Customs.
The total revenue for the year is now expected to fall by Rs.39.22 crores. Customs
duties are expected to show a drop of Rs.34 crores; the effect of restrictions on imports
on revenue appears to have been far more rigorous and the backlog from past licensing
not as much as was originally anticipated. Also during the year adjustments were
made in export duties on a scale not visualised when the Budget was framed. The
revenue from Union Excises is now placed at Rs.3.61 crores less while the yield from
the Wealth Tax, the Expenditure Tax and the Gift Tax will together be Rs.5.3 crores
less than anticipated. A drop of Rs.13 crores is anticipated in the grants from the U.S.
Government under the P.L.480 programme and of Rs.1.86 crores in the receipts from
Currency and Mint, but these will be more than off set by larger receipts of interest,
sale proceeds of evacuee property and an increase of Rs.3.04 crores in the contribution
from the Posts and Telegraphs Department.
22. Civil Expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs.521.28 crores against
the original budget of Rs.517.87 crores and Defence Expenditure at Rs.266.87 crores
against the original estimate of Rs.278.14 crores.
23. The increase of Rs.3.41 crores in Civil Expenditure is the net result of a
number of increases and decreases. Debt Services are expected to show an increase of
Rs.2.06 crores, reflecting the growing volume of the public debt, Currency and Mint
Rs.64 lakhs owing to increased provision for the loss on the destruction of uncurrent
coin, States, share of Union Excise duties Rs.4.2 crores, reflecting the increase in the
revenue from the shared duties during the year and a small carry over from last year,
and Miscellaneous Expenditure Rs.11.34 crores due mostly to an increase of Rs.6
crores in payments to State Governments to assist them to meet the additional
expenditure on the raising of the emoluments of the low paid employees and Rs.4.27
crores in the provision for the transfer of the sale proceeds of evacuee property which
is taken in reduction of the capital expenditure on the payment of compensation to
displaced persons. A part of the additional expenditure will be counterbalanced by a
saving of Rs.13 crores in the provision for the transfer to the Special Development
Fund of the grant received under the P.L. 480 programme for subsequent use on
development plans; and a shortfall of Rs.2.73 crores in expenditure under various
heads grouped under Civil Administration.
24. The decrease of Rs.11.27 crores in Defence Expenditure occurs largely in
the Army and Air Force estimates. The expenditure on the purchase of stores is likely
7

to be less than estimated; in the case of the Air Force, the decrease is also due to the
fact that payments on account of purchase of aircraft and other equipment from abroad
are expected to be less than was anticipated when the budget was framed.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1959-60
25. For the coming year, at the existing level of taxation, I am budgeting for
a total revenue of Rs.757.51 crores and an expenditure of Rs.839.18 crores, leaving a
deficit of Rs.81.67 crores.
26. With the continuing restriction on imports the downward trend in the
revenue from customs is likely to continue and for next year I am taking credit for a
sum of Rs.130 crores against the current year’s revised estimate of Rs.136 crores. The
revenue from Union Excise Duties next year is likely to show an improvement of
Rs.5.85 crores and the receipts from Corporation tax, and income-tax an improvement
of Rs.6.50 Crores. Under the other principal heads of revenue, the receipts next year
will be more or less the same as in the current year. The principal heads as a whole
will thus show an improvement of Rs.7.2 crores. Receipts under other heads next year
will in all be Rs.25.26 crores more than in the current year. This is the result of three
major changes. Firstly, the grants under the P.L.480 Programme are expected to amount
to R.s.15 crores against Rs.1 crore this year. Secondly, the profits from the Reserve
Bank next year have been placed at Rs.40 crores against Rs.30 crores this year. This
is a purely temporary arrangement; the stabilised amount that should be paid by the
Reserve Bank in subsequent years will be discussed during the course of next year.
Thirdly, the profits from the circulation of coin for which credit has been taken next
year amount to Rs.13.15 crores against Rs.2.75 crores this year. This increase is mainly
due to the transfer of Rs.10 crores from out of the accumulated surpluses in the past
on the circulation of rupee and small coins which had been kept under suspense. Tin
1956 the practice had been to keep all profits from the circulation of rupee coin,
whether silver or nickel, in suspense and also to accumulate under a suspense head the
net profits on the circulation of small coin, the transfer to revenue being limited to the
net expenditure in a year on the running of the Mints plus a fixed sum of Rs.45 lakhs.
This later arrangement was introduced during the last World War so as to even out the
impact of the fluctuating profits on circulation on the revenue budget. These accounting
arrangements were reviewed in 1956 in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General and it was decided that with effect from 1956-57 the actual profits on coinage
and the loss on the destruction of uncurrent coin should be adjusted directly as revenue
and expenditure. The accumulated sums held in suspense which amounted to a little
over Rs.50 crores were to be treated as a deficit neutralisation reserve and, although
the original intention was to draw upon this reserve in the course of the year, I have
decided, in view of the size of the revenue deficit, to take credit for Rs.10 crores from
this source in the budget itself. These increases will be partly balanced by a drop of
Rs.4.41 crores in the receipts from the surplus cement account of the State Trading
Corporation and Rs.3.31 crores in the receipts on account of Steel Equalisation Fund.
8

The contribution from the P & T Department will be Rs.1.18 crores less. The
contribution from the Railways creditable to revenues will also be Rs.42 lakhs less.
As Hon’ble Members are aware, the Railways pay General Revenues dividend at a
fixed rate of 4 per cent on the Capital at charge, which is partly adjusted as revenue
but mostly taken in reduction of expenditure under interest. Next year’s dividend from
Railways will amount to Rs.54.41 crores against Rs.50.03 crores this year. Of this,
Rs.48.43 crores will be taken in reduction of the expenditure under interest and the
balance of Rs.5.98 cores taken as revenue.
27. Payments to State Governments on account of their share of income-tax,
estate duty and tax on railway passenger fares next year, on the estimates of revenue
taken for these taxes, will amount to Rs.92.22, crores against Rs.89.07 crores in the
current year. Provision for the States’ share of divisible excises is made in the
expenditure estimates.
28. Civil expenditure next year will amount to Rs.596.5 crores and expenditure
on Defence Services to Rs.242.68 crores.
29. The main reasons for the increase of Rs.75.22 crores in civil expenditure
may be briefly mentioned. The grants received under the P.L.480 programme and
initially credited to revenue have to be transferred to the Special Development Fund
and used through it for subsequent expenditure. The provision for this transfer next
year, following the estimates adopted on the revenue side, is Rs.15 crores against Rs.1
crore in the revised estimates this year. Expenditure on debt services which rise with
the growing public debt, will absorb Rs.15.82 crores more than in the current year.
Expenditure on administrative services, such as on General Administration, Audit,
Administration of Justice, Jails, Police, External Affairs and so on, is likely to amount
to about Rs.21/2 crores more in all. Under heads covering Development and Social
Services, which include substantial provision on Plan outlay, the total expenditure
next year is estimated at Rs.168 crores roundly against Rs.145 3/4 crores this year. The
provision for Community Development will also be Rs.6.17 crores more than in this
year. Increased provision has also been included in the budget for grants to States for
the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and areas and Backward classes amounting in all to
about Rs.51 crores. These increased provisions mainly account for the rise in Civil
Expenditure. Detailed explanations for other minor variations are given in the notes
on the expenditure estimates circulated with the Demands for Grants.
30. The not expenditure m Defence Services in the coming year will be
Rs.24.19 crores less than in the current year. This improvement is the result of a
reduction in the gross expenditure by Rs.19.55 crores and an increase in receipts and
recoveries of Rs.4.64 crores.
31. The expenditure on the Army will be roughly on the same scale as in the
current year, but credit has been taken for a special item of Rs.5 crores on the receipt
9

side. A sum of Rs.14.56 crores representing the custodial charges recovered on Defence
surplus Stores borne on capital has been lying in suspense. This sum which is actually
of the nature of reimbursement of expenditure incurred from revenue is properly
creditable to revenue and not to capital. It has been decided to write it back to revenue
in three instalments, commencing with the budget for next year and a round sum of
R9.5 crores has been taken m this account.
32. Navy estimates show a small increase of Rs.1.34 crores for normal
development. The real saving occurs in Air Force estimates which show a drop of
Rs.23.84 crores due to reduced provision for payment on account of the purchase of
aircraft spares and other equipment, as a substantial portion of the payments for this
purpose would have been made in the current year. Expenditure m service pensions
will be Rs.2 crores higher as it is proposed to sanction to military personnel drawing
small pensions an increase on the analogy of that sanctioned to civil pensioners this
year.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
33. I shall now give a brief account of provision included in the budget for
capital outlay.
34. Excluding the adjustment for the transfer of capital assistance from the
United States to the Special Development Fund which is technically treated as capital
expenditure, the current year’s budget provided Rs.412 crores for capital outlay. The
corresponding figure is now expected to amount to Rs.395 crores. The Railways are
expected to draw Rs.18 crores less for their capital requirements which are not met
from their Development and Depreciation Reserves. Investment in the three Steel
projects will be Rs.14 crores less as the total equity investment of Rs.300 crores in
Hindustan Steel Limited would have been complete with this reduced investment; the
balance of the finance required by the Company will be, provided in the form of
loans. Food purchases are likely to involve a net additional outlay of Rs.24.26 crores.
The total capital outlay would have been higher than the figure mentioned by me but
for the receipt of an additional sum of Rs.13.33 crores (E 10 million) from the U.K.
Government as advance payments under the Sterling Pensions Arrangement.
35. The corresponding provision for capital outlay next year is Rs.420 crores.
It includes a sum of Rs.95.24 crores for the payment of the additional subscription to
the International Monetary Fund which I explained in some detail earlier in my speech.
The Railways will be drawing Rs.122 crores next year against Rs.121 crores this year
while Defence capital outlay is estimated at Rs.32.74 crores, an increase of about Rs.5
crores over the current year. Capital outlay on Posts and Telegraphs is expected to be
Rs.41/4 crores more and the net capital outlay on food purchases may be Rs.2 crores
higher. Increased provision has been made for investment in the various industrial
concerns and for Civil Aviation, Civil Works, the Dandakaranya Project and
development grants. The total provision which is mostly for development schemes or
10

for inescapable expenditure would have been much higher but for the fact that, as
explained earlier, the entire requirements for the steel plants will be met by loans.
36. To complete the picture of the capital requirements of Government, mention
should be made of the provision for loans and advances. In the coming year, loans to
State Governments, mostly for enabling them to finance their development schemes,
will amount to Rs.313 crores against Rs.327 crores this year. In addition, loans to Port
Trusts, Statutory Corporations, Government companies, etc., will absorb Rs.123 crores
this year and Rs.212 crores next year. Provision has been made for the grant of a loan
of Rs.52 crores to Hindustan Steel this year and Rs.122 crores next year. The Railways
will also take a loan of Rs.10.98 crores this year and Rs.10.88 crores next year for
their Development Fund to be repaid later. Details of the various loans proposed to be
given are shown in the Explanatory Memorandum.
37. The House may like to have some idea of the total provision included in
the budget for the implementation of the Plan and the magnitude of the total Plan
outlay next year. The budget includes a total provision of Rs.843 crores for
implementing the Plan, Rs.150 crores in the revenue budget and Rs.693 crores in the
capital budget. Out of this, Rs.63 crores from the revenue budget and Rs.195 crores
from the capital budget will be given as assistance to the States. In addition, the
Railways will be spending Rs.39 crores from their own resources and the States Rs.239
crores. Thus, the total Plan outlay, including interest on loans on River Valley Projects
which are added to Capital during the period of construction and short-term loans will
amount to Rs.1,121 crores.
38. As Hon’ble Members are aware, in view of the strain on resources, internal
and external, it has been decided to limit the five year outlay on the Plan to Rs.4,500
crores. The estimated expenditure in the first three years of the Plan is about Rs.2,450
crores, leaving a balance of Rs.2,050 crores to be incurred in the next two years. The
budget provision at the Centre and in the States is, as I explained just now, of the order
of Rs.1,120 crores. The resources position for the next two years will continue to
remain difficult and a considerable further effort to augment the resources available
for development will be necessary. With all the effort we have made, the proportion of
the national income accruing to the public exchequer still remains small. While with
the substantial external assistance we have been receiving the bulk of the Second Plan
will go through, we have to remember that we shall have sizeable repayments to make
in the period of the Third Plan. This underlines the necessity for a determined effort
to increase production and savings.
39. Thinking has already started on the Third Plan. It is obvious that the
objective should be to accelerate as much as possible the tempo of development the
country would have reached by the end of the Second Plan. It is, in my view, premature
to speculate on the size of the Plan; questions regarding the overall size, the allocations,
methods of raising resources, the quantum of external assistance required and likely
11

to become available are interlinked and are all under study. But it is clear that we
should explore every avenue to ensure that the Third Plan does take us decisively
forward and not keep the country at the level of development it has reached. We have
to aim at creating within the economy conditions which will make the process of
growth continuous and self-supporting.
WAYS AND MEANS
40. The overall deficit for the current year is now estimated at Rs.255 crores
against Rs.200 crores assumed in the budget. The increase of Rs.55 crores is the result
of a number of factors. The Revenue deficit is now expected to be Rs.32 crores more
than was estimated at the time of the budget, reasons for which I have given in the
earlier part of my speech. Foreign loan assistance for a variety of reasons is actually
likely to be Rs.46 crores less than the amount for which credit had been taken. We had
to give to the States additional loans amounting in all to Rs.42 crores, mainly arrears
of loans promised to them, and Rs.52 crores to Hindustan Steel. Food debits are also
expected to be higher by Rs.24 crores than the sum provided in the budget. The total
increase of Rs.126 crores on these accounts will, however, be partly counter-balanced
by some savings in the loan provision for miscellaneous loans, increased receipts
from internal borrowing and by probable shortfalls in expenditure spread over a large
number of heads. In the result, the net deficit to be covered by the expansion of
Treasury Bills is likely to amount to Rs.255 crores.
41. Public borrowing in the current year has been far more satisfactory than
in the last two or three years. The budget had assumed a market loan of Rs.145 crores
but the actual loan receipts amounted to Rs.202 crores. During, the year three new
loans were floated, the 31/2 per cent Bonds 1963, the 3-3/4 per cent National Plan
Bonds (Fifth Series) 1968 and the 4 per cent Loan 1973, the maturities offered having
a sufficient spread for meeting the varying requirements of the market. The total
amount offered for all the three loans was Rs.135 crores but the subscriptions accepted
amounted to Rs.142 crores. The market demand for investment, however, continued
and in August, 1958 we issued a new 31/2 per cent Loan 1968 for Rs.30 crores and
created a further issue of the 31 per cent National Plan Bonds 1967 for another Rs.30
crores. These securities were, in accordance with the usual practice, issued to the
Reserve Bank to be sold by them to the market. The net receipts from regular loans
this year will be Rs.181 crores against the original estimate of Rs.125 crores.
42. There was a welcome revival in the market demand for short-term
investment through treasury bills. In July last, the Reserve Bank of India renewed the
weekly auctions of treasury bills after a lapse of over two years. They also revived the
practice of selling intermediate treasury bills to the market, an operation which had
been in abeyance for over fifteen years. It is expected that the total outstanding treasury
bills with the public at the end of the current year would amount to Rs.25 crores.
12

43. Under Small Savings, the Budget had taken credit for a net receipt of
Rs.100 crores. This has turned out to be over-optimistic and, although there has been
an improvement in the collections this year as compared with the previous year, the
net collections are not likely to be anywhere near the figure taken in the Budget. The
net collections from Small Savings have been steadily rising from a figure of Rs.37.57
crores in 1951-52 to a figure of Rs.69.6 crores in 1957-58. In the first ten months of
the current year, the net collections have amounted to Rs.47 crores against a little
under Rs.38 crores in the corresponding period of the previous year. In the last two
months of that year, the collections were somewhat exceptional owing to the special
drives undertaken by some of the State Governments. After allowing for this and on
the trend of actuals this year, I do not think it wise to take credit for more than Rs.75
crores for this year. Postal Savings Banks are still not doing as well as in the past, but
there has been an improvement in the sales of National Plan Savings Certificates and
Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates.
44. While on this subject. I should like briefly to mention the various steps
taken during the course of this year for intensification of the savings movement. To
revive the popularity of the postal savings banks facilities for withdrawal by cheques
which, were tried out as an experiment in Bombay are being extended to a large
number of post offices at a number of big towns, the intention being to provide the
facility in all post offices as early as possible. It has been decided to allow sales of
Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates through agents on a commission basis. The
National Savings Certificates Rules have been rationalised and re-issued and a
concentrated drive for the recruitment of more authorised agents and the formation of
more savings groups undertaken. Publicity has been largely decentralised in consultation
with the State Governments who will now be in charge of this work in the States
except, to a limited extent, where it has been found desirable to retain the work with
the Centre. Publicity will now be largely in the regional languages at the State level
and this should assist in the further development of the movement. The question of
replacing the multiple agency system which has grown up with years by a uniform
system is also under consideration. Government have accepted the principle of allowing
investors in small savings to nominate the persons to whom the investment should be
repaid on the lines of the assignments made of insurance policies and the necessary
legislation to permit this will be undertaken shortly. The progressive diversification of
investment has been taken a step further by the introduction, with effect from the 2nd
January this year, of the Cumulative Time Deposit Scheme under which small monthly
payments can be accumulated at post offices for periods of five or ten years at attractive
rates of interest.
45. The National Savings Organisation has been keeping in close touch with
the State Governments in developing the savings movement. The State Governments’
interest in the movement has been further emphasised by a modification in the
arrangement for the sharing of the net receipts with them. When the States’ share was
13

raised to two-thirds, a condition was laid down that, in any year in which a State
Government floated a market loan, it should surrender to the Centre one-third of the
loan proceeds. This condition has now been withdrawn so that the States now receive
two-thirds of the net receipts from small savings while retaining the whole of their
market borrowing.
46. For next year’s Budget, I have taken credit for a market borrowing of
Rs.225 crores, I taking into account the fact that the market will receive a repayment
of Rs.110 crores from the maturing 3 per cent Second Victory Loan-1959-61. I have
also taken credit for a further small expansion of Rs.15 crores in the treasury bills
with the public. For Small Savings I have taken a net credit of Rs.85 crores, a
modest increase of Rs.10 crores over the likely receipts this year. On the best estimate
that can be made at present, I expect that foreign assistance next year would amount
to Rs.337 crores.
47. I may now summarise the overall budgetary position next year. At the
existing level of taxation and expenditure, there will be a revenue deficit of Rs.82
crores. Capital outlay will amount to Rs.420 crores, loans to State Governments and
others to Rs.525 crores and debt repayments to Rs.130 crores. This total outgo of
Rs.1,157 crores will be met to the extent. of Rs.111 crores by repayments of loans
to Government, Rs.240 crores from public borrowing in India, Rs.85 crores from
small savings, Rs.337 crores from foreign assistance, Rs.95 crores from the issue of
special securities to meet the payment of the additional subscription to the
International Monetary Fund and Rs.44 crores from miscellaneous receipts under
Debt and Deposit heads, leaving a deficit of Rs.245 crores which will be met by the
issue of treasury bills.
48. I now come to my proposals for dealing with the revenue deficit for the
coming year.

PART B
49. The deficits in the current and the ensuing years are somewhat exceptional,
the significant contraction of revenue coinciding with an increase in. the quantum of
development expenditure met from revenue. Although in the past we have been realising
surpluses on revenue account every year, I feel that it would be unwise to leave the
deficit in the coming year wholly uncovered. In past the comfortable revenue position
was partly due to the resilience of revenue and partly to shortfalls in expenditure
inevitable while the country is in the process of gearing its administrative machinery
to implement an expanding development plan. Both these factors are ceasing to operate.
The buoyance of revenue in the past was mainly under Customs but because of the
drastic cuts in imports and the progressive freeing of our exports from export duty,,
Customs revenue has suddenly contracted and is likely to remain static for some
14

years. The administrative machinery is now better equipped for implementing the
Plan and budgetary provisions are likely to be spent more fully than in the past. For
all these reasons I think that a part of the deficit next year would have to be covered.
This would also be consistent with our policy of continuously mobilizing additional
resources for the Plan.
50. In determining the extent to which the prospective deficit should be
covered, I have taken into account the amount by which taxation has been increased
in the last two years. Our record in the matter of raising additional resources by way
of taxation for the Plan has, I venture to think, been quite impressive since the Second
Plan came into operation. In 1966-57, taking the proposals in the original and the
supplementary budgets together, the total taxation raised was of the order of Rs.80
crores. In the following year, we did even better and touched nearly a hundred crores.
In the current year, the net additional taxation was not significant but, taking the three
years of the Plan together, the additional taxation has been quite substantial. Having
this in mind, I propose to cover only about a fourth of the anticipated deficit of Rs.82
crores in the coming year.
51. The next problem is how to distribute this additional taxation between
direct and indirect taxes. We have only just achieved an integrated scheme of direct
taxation and I think that for the present we should concentrate on improving the
administrative machinery, simplifying the existing procedures and plugging loop-holes.
By these methods we should be able to improve our revenue from these sources
without many major changes. They cannot, however, produce immediate results and,
although my proposals include certain changes in the rates in this field also, the bulk
of the additional revenue next year will, I fear, have to come from indirect taxes. I
shall first deal with indirect taxation and then proceed to direct taxation.
INDIRECT TAXATION
52. In the field of indirect taxation my proposals are mostly by way of
readjustments of rates and concessions in the existing duties of excise. These are
described in some detail in the memorandum circulated with the budget papers and I
shall only mention them briefly here.
53. The duty on refined diesel oils and vapourising oil is being raised from 40
naye paise per imperial gallon to 80 naye paies. There is at present a price advantage
in favour of diesel oil of which we have to import substantial quantities. Both as a
measure of increasing revenue and conserving foreign exchange the proposed increase
is justified. As a consequential adjustment, the rate of duty on low-speed diesel oil is
also being increased from Rs.40 per ton to Rs.50 per ton. The total yield from these
two measures will be Rs.7.85 crores a year.
54. The duty on art silk fabrics is being raised from 6 pies per square yard to
8 naye paise per square yard. Simultaneously the, exemption in the present form in
15

respect of products of the first nine looms will be reduced to four looms. The increased
levy is amply justified by the large profits which are made by the industry. The estimated
yield will be Rs.1 crore a year. The lowering of the exemption will also bring in Rs.2p
lakhs by way of additional duties which accrue to the States.
55. The effective rates of duty on rayon yarn and staple fibre are also being
raised by 60 per cent to yield an additional Rs.50 lakhs.
56. The duty on motor vehicles tyres is being raised from 30 per cent ad
valorem to 40 per cent ad valorem. There will be no change in the rate of duty on
cycle tyres. The additional revenue is estimated at Rs.1.75 crores.
57. An increase is also being made in the duty on vegetable product which
will increase from Rs.7 per cwt. to Rs.8.75 cwt. with a corresponding adjustment in
the exemptions in favour of the small producers. The additional revenue will be
Rs.95 lakhs.
58. Vegetable non-essential oils were first subjected to excise in 1956, but
some preference to medium and small scale producers was given by exempting
production up to 125 tons per annum on a slab basis. In 1957 the free slab was
brought down to 75 tons and a lower rate of duty levied on production between 75
tons and 125 tons. These concessions have been reviewed and it is now proposed to
withdraw the exemption from all power driven units and limit the concessional levy to
only the first 75 tons of production. These changes, which will be made by notification
and will not affect village ghanis in any way, are expected to yield Rs.4.4 crores.
59. Khandsari sugar is now exempt from excise duty but pays the usual sales
taxes. There has always been a fiscal preference in favour of this sugar but, with the
recent substantial increases in the duty on crystal sugar, this preference has further
widened resulting in the shift of production to this form of sugar. There are cogent
reasons for reducing the margin and this is being done by the levy of the basic duty of
Rs.5.60 per cwt. with an additional duty of 70 naye paise in replacement of the sales
taxes. The basic duty will yield Rs.1.82 crores and the additional duty which will
accrue in its entirety to the States, Rs.25 lakhs.
60. Certain adjustments are also being made in the duty on various kinds of
cigarettes involving an increase of 16 per cent in the level of duties for cigarettes
taken as a whole. These adjustments are expected to yield a revenue of Rs.1.5 crores.
61. Incidentally, the present tariff on unmanufactured tobacco has led to some
diversion to biri-making of tobacco which was previously used for hookah. I am
taking powers to assess at the higher rate such varieties of tobacco as may be specially
notified and as are actually used for the making of biris.
62. The incidence of excise and export duties on tea has been under continuous
review. It has been decided to readjust the rate of excise duties on the teas grown in
16

certain areas of the country and to reduce, at the same time, the effective rate of export
duties from 26 naye paise per lb. to 24 naye paise per lb. These changes will result in
an additional revenue of Rs.58 lakhs under Union excise and a reduction of Rs.93
lakhs in the yield from the export duty. In the net, the industry will benefit to the
extent of Rs.35 lakhs.
63. The total additional revenue from the various measures I have just
mentioned will amount to Rs.20.35 crores from the basic duties and Rs.45 lakhs from
the additional duties in replacement of sales taxes which accrue to the States. As
Hon’ble Members are aware, the basic duties on tobacco, vegetable product, tea,
sugar and vegetable non-essential oils are shared with the States in accordance with
the award of the last Finance Commission. Twentyfive per cent of the net additional
revenue from these commodities will have to be distributed to the States, after deducting
the cost of collection. This payment will be of the order of Rs.2.27 crores. Allowing
for this and for the additional duties to be paid to them, I am taking the net additional
revenue from changes in Union excise duties at Rs.18.08 crores.
64. I propose to make no major change in regard to customs duties. But there
will be a countervailing increase in the import duties on the commodities on which
excise duties are being increased an)d this by itself will bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.3.65 crores. The reduction in the export duty on tea will, however, involve a
drop of Rs.93 lakhs in revenue as I have mentioned earlier. I propose to make a small
increase in the duty on unexposed cinema films to yield Rs.5 lakhs a year for the
benefit of the Film Finance Corporation which is being set up. With this small addition
the net additional yield from customs duties next year will amount to Rs.2.77 crores.
DIRECT TAXATION
65. I propose to increase, with effect from 1959-60 the Wealth tax payable by
individuals and Hindu undivided families by half a per cent at each slab. The new
rates of Wealth tax on individuals will be 1 per cent on wealth in excess of Rs.2 lakhs
but upto Rs.12 lakhs, 11/2 per cent on the excess between Rs.12 lakhs and Rs.22 lakhs
and 2 per cent on any excess above that. For Hindu undivided families, corresponding
changes will be made. The extra revenue on this account will be Rs.2.5 crores.
66. The revenue from Expenditure tax has been quite disappointing this year.
It is a new tax, not tried anywhere else in the world, and in the first year of its
imposition in our country, it is only right that we should have proceeded cautiously. I
think, however, that the time has come to tighten the existing law to some extent. I
propose, therefore, to withdraw some of the exemptions now available and, in particular,
to provide that the husband, wife and minor children should be regarded as one unit
for the exemption limit of Rs.30,000 in the matter of non-taxable expenditure and not
as separate assessees if they have incomes in their individual rights.
67. Coming to income tax, I propose to make no change in the present rates
and structure of personal income tax. I have, however, some proposals for changing
17

the present system of taxation of company profits and dividends. At present, an Indian
company is generally required to pay income tax at 30 per cent plus a surcharge of 1.5
per cent and super tax at 20 per cent on its total income. When dividends are declared
out of the balance after payment of these taxes, a portion of the income-tax paid by
the company is deemed to have been paid by the shareholders themselves. In the
assessments of the latter, the dividends received by them are included in their income
after being “grossed” and they are credited with the amounts deemed to have been
paid by the company on their behalf. This process of grossing is somewhat complicated.
For one thing, the rate of grossing depends on the effective rate at which the company’s
profits are initially subjected to tax. The effective rate in its turn depends upon the
composition of the income of the company. The dividends themselves may be paid out
of reserves accumulated over some years, which again complicates the determination
of the effective rate at which the profits have been taxed. Further, the assessments of
shareholders have to await the completion of the assessments of the companies. All
these lead to considerable inconvenience to all concerned, and the scheme I propose
seeks to avoid this.
68. The main points of this scheme are briefly these. The legal fiction of
deeming the income-tax paid by the company as having been paid by the shareholder
and the complicated process of grossing the dividends received by the latter will be
abolished. The overall tax rate hitherto applicable to Indian companies will be so
fixed that the yield will be equal to the present annual gross yield less the annual
credit now given to the shareholders. The tax liability of the shareholders will no
longer be related to the tax borne by the companies. So far as the shareholders are
concerned, companies will deduct tax at a prescribed flat rate and credit it to
Government. This tax will be re-imbursed to the shareholders at the time of their
assessment as is done today in the case of interest on Government securities. I hope to
devise a scheme for issuing exemption certificates for small shareholders so that the
question of re-imbursement does not arise in their cases.
69. The scheme will be implemented in two stages. In the first stage, that is,
during 1959-60 income-tax will be deducted by the companies at the same rate as for
Government securities from dividends distributed by them but only from dividends
declared for the year the profits of which will be assessed to tax in 1960-61; for
example, dividends declared for the year ending 30th June, 1959. Dividends declared
for any earlier year, the profits of which are assessable in 1959-60 (for example,
dividends for the calendar year 1958) will not be subject to this deduction and will
continue to be assessed under the existing provisions. During the second stage, that is
during 1960-61, the overall tax rate applicable to the companies under the scheme will
come into operation. The present scheme of grossing of dividends will cease to operate
from 1st April, 1960 in respect of dividends declared for the accounting year relevant
to the assessment year 1960-81 and subsequent years.
18

70. As part of the scheme of simplification of company taxation, I propose to
combine in the income tax and super tax rates of companies, the net incidence of the
present taxes on income, excess dividends and wealth. For purposes of advance payment
of tax by companies under Section 18-A of the income Tax Act, I propose a rate of 20
per cent, for income tax and 25 per cent for super tax, that is to say, a total of 45 per
cent. This rate will secure the same revenue as is at present derived from the taxes on
the wealth and profits of companies and I propose, therefore, to abolish the Wealth
Tax on companies and the Excess Dividends Tax.
71. The changes in company taxation will not effect the divisible pool of
income tax in the coming year. In 1960-61 a part of the tax now accruing to the pooI
may not, for technical reasons, be treated as divisible. It is Government’s intention to
secure that, until the matter has been examined by the next Finance Commission, the
State Governments continue to receive as their share of income tax about the same
amount which they would have received had this change not been made.
72. Foreign companies which declare dividends outside India will, of course,
not be subject to the scheme I have described. However, some adjustment is necessary
in the rates applicable to them on account of the withdrawal of the Wealth Tax on
companies. The present rate applicable to such companies is 61.5 per cent and I
propose to raise it to 63 per cent with effect from 1960-61.
73. Before leaving the subject of company taxation, I should like to mention
one further change. While ordinary bonus issues are subject to tax, bonus issues which
are made out of share premium accounts are not now taxed. With effect from 1960-61,
I propose to subject these issues also to taxation like other bonus issues.
74. A few more changes in the income Tax Act will be necessary as a corollary
to the new scheme. I will not, however, tire the House with a detailed description of
these changes. They are incorporated in the Finance Bill and are explained in the
Memorandum on the Bill circulated with the Budget papers.
75. The Finance Bill also contains some other minor changes. These have no
significant effect on revenue and I would like to mention to the House only two of
them; one of them withdraws the concessions now available to incomes earned abroad
but not remitted to India upto a limit of Rs.4,500 and the other provides for certain
allowances to be given in pursuance of the agreement entered into with an oil company
for the exploration of oil in the West Bengal area.
NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
76. I would now summarise the net effect of the taxation proposals. The
changes in the Union excise duties, excluding the shares that accrue to the States,
will yield Rs.18.08 crores. The changes in Customs duties will bring in Rs.2.77
crores and the increase in the Wealth Tax Rs.2.5 crores, a total of Rs.23.35 crores.
This will reduce the deficit an revenue account from Rs.81.67 crores to Rs.58.32
19

crores, about the same amount as in the current year which I propose to leave
uncovered. The overall budgetary deficit will also be reduced from Rs.245 crores to
Rs.222 crores.
CONCLUSION
77. The annual budget is now something more than a simple account of
Government’s housekeeping. Each budget marks a stage in the country’s continuous
development and has to be judged by the contribution it makes to this development. In
a sense therefore, the stage that has been reached in the implementation of the Plan
conditions this budget. So far as the Plan is concerned, I think it is accepted by every
one that subject to such minor adjustments as may be necessary and were made at the
time of the recent reappraisal by the National Development Council, we have to go
forward with the Plan. For me, as for my predecessors in this place this has been the
major factor round which the budget has to be built. In doing so, I have kept
continuously in mind the main considerations necessary for the successful
implementation of the Plan. If I may repeat them, these are the maximum mobilisation
of resources by taxation and borrowing, firm control over the growth of nondevelopment expenditure and minimum recourse to borrowing from the central bank
for the finance required for development. In regard to the raising of resources, although
the quantum of additional taxation next year is moderate compared to what was raised
in the first two years of the Plan, it is still substantial. As regards the growth of
expenditure, Hon’ble Members will notice that the next year’s budget provides for a
substantial drop in Defence expenditure and that the bulk of the increase in Civil
expenditure is on account of larger provision for development. We are doing our best
to see that there is no avoidable increase in non-development expenditure and in the
Finance Ministry and in the Planning Commission, we have machinery for securing
economies in non-Plan and Plan expenditure. An account of the work of the economy
units is given to Parliament from time to time and I need not dilate on it here. I would,
however, assure the House that I am fully conscious of the imperative need for tightening
control over such expenditure and it is our constant endeavour to achieve the utmost
economy without sacrifice of efficiency or output. As regards borrowing from the
central bank, although the overall budgetary deficit for the coming year is smaller
than in the current year and very much smaller than the deficit in 1957-58, it is still
somewhat higher than I myself would have wished and Government had in mind some
months ago. The House will appreciate that to a large extent this deficit reflects the
outlay on the Plan-which cannot be cut down without accentuating unemployment
and leading to stagnation. Nevertheless, I may assure the House that Government do
not take a complacent view of the situation and it is my intention to see how far the
deficit could be reduced by appropriate measures during the course of the year.
78. In recent months, we have been passing through a difficult period and as
the Prime Minister summed it up so aptly when he presented the budget last year, our
20

crisis is a crisis of development, a crisis of resources. I feel we have passed through
the most difficult phase and that there is no reason for taking a pessimistic view of the
situation. Many of the major development schemes will be completed in the course of
the remaining period of the Plan and will start yielding results. The country’s foreign
exchange difficulties are being steadily surmounted and the overall budgetary deficits
have started moving down significantly. Although the price situation is still a matter
of some concern, there is no reason to doubt the inherent soundness of the country’s
economy and its ability to weather the current difficulties. These difficulties are purely
transitional and should act as a spur to greater effort on the part of the community.
There can, in any case, be no question of looking back or of slowing down the country’s
economic development. This would require greater production, greater saving and
more restraint in consumption - in other words, greater efforts and more sacrifices by
the community for ensuring a better future for the country. I am certain that these
efforts and sacrifices would be forthcoming and that we could go forward with a stout
heart and with confidence in our high destiny.
(February 28, 1959)

21

