SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJ1 R. DESAI DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
AND MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET
FOR THE YEAR 1967-68 (Interim)
Sir,
The presentation of the Budget is an important occasion when the Government
comes to this Honourable House ‘for approval of its proposals for expenditure and
mobilization of resources during the coming fiscal year. On this occasion, however,
we are meeting under special circumstances. As Honourable Members are aware, a
vote on account for enabling the Government to carry on its business during the
financial year 1967-68 has to be considered and passed before the 3 1st of March. But
the new Government at the Centre and the Honourable Members assembled here
cannot, between now and the end of March, give full consideration to the budgetary
requirements for the whole of the coming year. The Government, therefore, wishes to
bring before this Honourable House in a few weeks’ time a Budget outlining the
proposals for the full year, 1967-68. The usual Economic Survey will also be presented
to the House together with the final Budget.
2.
My purpose today is a limited one. I propose first to present the revised
estimates for the current year in the usual way. I propose also to present the estimates
of Government receipts, both revenue and capital for the year 1967-68 at existing
rates of taxation and on the basis of indications available at present regarding non-tax
receipts. As for Government expenditure during 196768. I shall seek a vote on account
for a period of four months only. The estimates of expenditure for 1967-68 as a whole
that I shall be presenting today are tentative and have been limited strictly to resources
that are now in sight. These will be revised appropriately in the Budget to be presented
later in the light of a thorough review of requirements and resources that we propose
to undertake in the meanwhile. I shall introduce a Finance Bill today which merely
seeks to continue the existing tax structure for a further year.
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
3.
Even for my limited purpose, it would be appropriate to draw the attention
of the Honourable Members to a few salient features of the current economic scene.
The initial year of the Fourth Plan which is now drawing to a close has proved
disappointing in many ways. Economic conditions caused concern not only because
output was low and the foreign exchange situation disconcerting but also because
prices have continued to rise rapidly despite a slackening in the pace of monetary
expansion. Honourable Members are aware that unfavourable weather conditions have
plagued the Indian economy for the second successive year; and the drought has
overshadowed the economic scene for the past many months. Our present difficulties
1

should not obscure altogether the strength and resilience that the Indian economy has
acquired over the three Plan periods. But our policies and expectations in the short-run
must necessarily be based on a realistic assessment of the current situation.
4.
Although agricultural output is likely to show some recovery compared to
the rock-bottom levels of 1965-66, recent estimates are far less optimistic than earlier
predictions. Production levels in the current year will, it is feared remain far below the
bumper harvests of 1964-65. Total foodgrains production during 1966-67, for example,
may be as low as 76 million tonnes as against 89 million tomes in 1964-65 and 72.3
million tonnes in 1965-66. The failure of the monsoons has wiped out incomes and
purchasing power in large parts of the country and has created a serious supply problem
not only in respect of foodgrains but also many raw materials. Once again, we have
had to step up Imports at the expense of our slender foreign exchange reserves and
with the help of food assistance from friendly countries. Further substantial imports,
are, however, still urgently needed to tide over the period before the arrival of the new
kharif crop. The question of food aid to India is to be discussed at a meeting of the Aid
India Consortium early next month. Whatever the available supplies will also have to
be distributed equitably; and we propose to evolve soon an agreed Policy in this
regard in co-operation with State Governments. Meanwhile, the programme to raise
sharply the availability of fertilizers and high yielding seeds, to strengthen farm credit
and to promote agricultural research is making reasonable progress.
5.
The growth of industrial output had slowed down considerably in the
final year of the Third Plan. In the current financial year also production has increased
rather slowly. The index number of industrial production showed an increase of 2.6
per cent during April-November 1966 over the corresponding period of the preceding
year. The slackness in industrial growth was a widespread phenomenon and there was,
in fact, an absolute drop in production in many agriculture-based industries, such as
cotton textiles, vanaspati, jute, etc. On the other hand, industries catering to the
requirements of agriculture-such as those producing diesel pumping sets or
pesticides-have fared quite well. The failure of monsoons affected industry in many
ways. First, agricultural raw materials were scarce and their prices were high. Secondly,
farm incomes were low and consequently the effective demand for manufactured
consumer goods was depressed. Thirdly, high prices of food diverted urban purchasing
power away from manufactured articles. Fourthly, economy measures introduced by
Government designed to limit monetary expansion at a time when food was scarce,
created areas of depressed demand for certain categories of manufactures, for example
railway wagons and machine tools.
6.
Partly as a result of low domestic production, our exports also have not
fared well during 1966-67. Preliminary data indicate that the foreign exchange value
of exports shipments during April-December 1966 was about 9 per cent below that in
the same period of 1965. Apart from domestic supply shortages, the export position
during these months reflects the dislocation in trade that followed in the wake of the
2

change in the exchange rate. Demand conditions in some of our major markets abroad
have also been slack. These and other developments in world markets have tended to
depress the value of our traditional exports, for example, tea, jute manufactures and
cotton fabrics. On the other hand, these losses were offset to some extent by gains
secured by such items as leather goods, footwear, iron ore, steel products and
cashew kernels.
7.
A deterioration in exports combined with rising debt service payments
caused a depletion of our international reserves. Between April 1966 and December
1966, our foreign exchange reserve fell by the equivalent of about 18 million dollars
despite a net drawing of 137.5 million dollars from the International Monetary Fund.
It is also noteworthy that this loss was incurred during a period when imports were
significantly lower than during the same period of 1965. The reduced import bill
reflected the stringency of quantitative restrictions on most non-food items in 1965-66.
Although total imports were rather low, food imports increased substantially during
the current fiscal year owing to the necessity of supplementing domestic supply. Imports
of fertilizers were also substantially larger than in earlier years. The liberalisation of
licensing policy has not yet had an impact on the actual flow of imports, although
there are indications of sizeable orders having been placed against the larger volume
of import licences issued this year. Since December 1966 there has been some
Improvement in foreign exchange reserves. A part of this Improvement, however, is
on account of temporary and reversible factors like an inflow of banking funds.
8.
Honourable Members will recall that in the last year of the Third Plan
there was a partial pause in foreign aid. This interruption, together with general
conditions in the country, has led to somewhat smaller disbursements of foreign
assistance during the current year than was envisaged earlier. In all, Consortium
countries pledged 900 million dollars for non-project aid during 1966-67. Against this
pledge, firm commitments have been signed for 760 million dollars. The remainder is
expected to be committed soon. Honourable Members would appreciate, that in a
continuing programme, a firm pledge of assistance enables us to license imports even
in advance of actual commitment of funds, so that, for all practical purposes, the
Consortium pledge of 900 million dollars has been available to us for some time for
backing our import programme. In addition, members of the Consortium signed several
loan agreements relating to particular projects in the field of steel, power, railway, etc.
Aid agreements were also signed with other friendly Governments-the Soviet Union,
Yugoslavia, Hungary and Sweden.. For this aid we are thankful to our friends abroad.
I must also acknowledge gratefully the generous assistance received from a number of
countries and international organisations for scarcity relief which has helped greatly
in the difficult food situation.
9.
The agricultural situation has not only led to a slow down in industry, an
impairment of export capacity and a heavy bill for food imports but it has also
aggravated the inflationary problem. Food prices rose at a more rapid rate during
3

1966-67 than in the previous year. The demand for compensatory allowances by
fixed-income groups to protect their standard of living gained ground and put
considerable pressure on Government finances. The index number of wholesale prices
went up by about 17 per cent between March 26, 1966 and February 18, 1967.
10. Monetary expansion slowed down during the current year. In the current
busy season, however, bank credit to the private sector has expanded more rapidly
than in the 1965-66 busy season whereas deposit accrual to the banks has been on a
smaller scale. The busy season has yet to run its course, and in the prevailing price
situation, it would be clearly necessary to keep a close watch on monetary developments.
11. The pace of the price increase is the most disturbing, fact which
Government will have to keep in focus in formulating its financial and economic
policies. What we have witnessed essentially is a spiral of rising prices where shortages
and budgetary deficits have led to higher prices and higher wages and dearness
allowances. This in turn has accentuated budgetary difficulties and has led to further
rise in prices. This process has to be halted by concerted action on many fronts. But
Honourable Members, I am sure, would agree that our first task in these circumstances
to restore financial and general economic stability the need for which would be all the
more clear from the brief review that I propose to make now of budgetary developments
during the current year.
REVISED ESTIMATES 1966-67
12. As in the case of the general economic situation, the budgetary outlook
daring the current year has also been dominated by the set-back in agriculture. On the
expenditure side, considerable scarcity relief assistance had to be provided to the
States to enable them to generate gainful employment and to extend other assistance
to the population in distress. Large Imports of foodgrains had also to be subsidised in
order not to accentuate the price-rise. Even so, higher prices added to the burden of
dearness allowance and necessitated increases in other Government outlay. Increased
outlays on agricultural schemes were also undertaken in order to step up food production
on an urgent basis.
13. On the receipts side, the generally sluggish conditions in the economy
have been reflected in lower tax revenue. The decline in non-food Imports has meant
lower collections under import duties. The Railways too have suffered from the
recession in demand and the higher wage bill consequent on enhanced prices of food
articles; they have for the first time in decades failed to earn the normal dividend.
14. The Centre has also had to incur substantially larger liabilities on behalf
of the States than was envisaged at the beginning of the year. The net result is that
despite economy measures undertaken by Government, the current year is expected to
end with a much larger deficit than was envisaged initially.
4

15. Customs revenue will be Rs.36 crores more than the Budget estimate. This
is after taking credit for sizeable receipts under export duties levied after devaluation.
Import duties proper show a shortfall of about Rs.79 crores. Income-tax revenue shows
a fall of Rs.40 crores whereas excise duties are expected to yield Rs.10 crores more.
The States’ share of Central taxes and duties will also be Rs.12 crores more, mainly
due to payment of arrears. The net tax receipts retained at the Centre will thus be
slightly less than the Budget estimate, despite the large, receipts of Rs.117 crores
under export duties.
16. The net budgetary receipts corresponding to loan assistance obtained
from foreign countries and international organisations will be Rs.135 crores more.
This, however, is due to the accounting difference made by the change in the exchange
rate. In foreign exchange terms, disbursements’, of gross assistance have fallen short
of earlier expectations. The rupees accruing from PL 480 Imports from the United
States of America will be nearly Rs.93 crores more. Assistance of the value of Rs.85
crores in the form of food-gifts from Canada, Australia, Soviet Russia and a number
of other countries has also accrued to the Budget.
17. On the disbursement side, the purchase and sale of food grains and
fertilisers account for a deterioration of Rs.235 crores. The bulk of this-approximately
Rs.180 crores-is on account of the subsidy borne by Government on imported foodgrains
and fertilisers.
18. During the year, provision had also to be made for a substantial increase
in assistance to State Governments. Rs.108 crores more were provided to enable them
to undertake larger Plan outlays. Of this, Rs.60 crores were for minor and major
Irrigation and rural electrification schemes, in order to step up agricultural programmes,
particularly of a quick yielding type. Additional scarcity relief assistance sanctioned
to the States amounted to Rs.40 crores. Special loans amounting to Rs.113 crores had
also to be provided to enable some of the States to clear their unauthorised overdrafts
with the Reserve Bank, thus adding up to a total of Rs.261 crores by way of increased
assistance to the States.
19. The Central Plan including the outlay in the Union Territories financed
out of the Budget is expected to be Rs.117 crores more than provided for in the
Budget estimates. This increase is accounted for by the need to provide more funds to
public sector undertakings and larger assistance towards debenture programmes of
land mortgage banks, agricultural credit stabilisation funds, consumer cooperatives
and family planning and additional outlays in respect of schemes of agricultural
importance. An additional provision of Rs.13 crores for the financial institutions has
also been included here. Honourable Members would appreciate that larger provision
became necessary after devaluation in the case of many Plan projects and programmes.
20. On the non-Plan side, an increase of Rs.29 crores occurs under defence,
including border roads, due mainly to devaluation and dearness allowance increases,
5

Similarly, interest charges show an increase of Rs.48 crores. There are a number of
other individual variations which taken together counterbalance one another and I
shall not mention them.
21. The increase in expenditure might have been even more but for the
economy measures taken during the year. The Budget grants were reviewed in the
course of the year and sizeable reductions were made in revenue and other expenditure.
The savings located were of the order of Rs.91 crores, which made it possible to
absorb unavoidable additional requirement.
22. In the aggregate, the Revised Estimates, show a deficit at the Centre of as
much as Rs.350 crores for the current year, as against Rs.32 crores estimated at the
Budget stage. The large budgetary deficit has been a matter of concern to Government
as It must be to the House. I would, however, like to draw the attention of Honourable
Members to the fact that but for the additional assistance to some of the States to clear
their overdrafts and the subsidised sale of foodgrains and fertilizers, the deficit at the
Centre would not have been materially different from what was originally anticipated.
23. The assistance of Rs.113 crores to some of the States because of their
overdrafts from the Reserve Bank has merely had the effect of increasing the deficit
at the Centre. The financial position of the State Governments will not be clear till
their Budgets for next year are presented. And I would like to remind Honourable
Members that if there are some States which have contributed to the deficit at the
Centre, there are others whose financial position has been sound. Indeed, it is likely
that by taking on a substantially larger responsibility for assisting the States, the
Centre has, during the year, improved the financial position of the State Governments
taken together.
24. But Honourable Members, I am sure, would agree that a situation in which
any State Government can run unauthorised overdrafts from the Reserve Bank without
limit cannot be allowed to continue. Apart from adding to the deficit at the Centre,
such a situation is not equitable between one State and another. In view of the
seriousness of this problem, the Reserve Bank, in consultation with the Central
Government, informed the States in December last that in case an unauthorised overdraft
persisted in future, the Bank would issue a notice to the State calling upon it to take
adequate steps to eliminate such overdraft within a Period of three weeks failing
which it would be open to the Bank to stop payments on account of the State.
Simultaneously, the facilities for temporary accommodation were also suitably enlarged
to give the State Governments greater flexibility in their ways and means position. It
is my earnest hope that with these arrangements, we would begin a new phase in
which deficit financing by the State Governments would be a thing of the past. At the
same time, Honourable Members, I am sure, would agree that the Centre also will
have to set a better example of financial discipline, if it is to enlist the cooperation of
the States in ensuring the maintenance of sound fiscal and budgetary policies. At this
stage, I can only assure the House that we are determined to pursue sound financial
6

policies ourselves and to ensure the same in the States with the cooperation of all
concerned, including the cooperation of the Honourable Members assembled here.
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1967-68
25. I shall now turn to the outlook for the next year. A number of different and
even conflicting considerations have to be taken into account in framing the Budget
for 1967-68. Plan outlays were restricted in the first year of the Fourth Plan and there
is obviously need to resume the momentum of development as soon as possible. In
any event, agricultural programmes, including minor irrigation, major irrigation works
nearing completion, provision of credit and the like must be carried forward vigorously
if the momentum already gained in the implementation of the new agricultural strategy
is not to be lost. The same is true of the family planning programme as of industrial
programmes, including production of fertilizers and pesticides which are so essential
for underpinning our efforts for increasing the productivity of our land. Developments
in other sectors also cannot be held back for long without jeopardising the progress
towards self-reliance.
26. In one sense, the present situation in which there are signs of a recession
in demand and of excess capacity in many areas, notably capital goods industries and
transport is propitious for a step-up in developmental outlays. Liberalisation of imports
and greater availability of non-project assistance should facilitate our task. On the
other hand, the prevailing price situation and the very difficult supply position created
by the second drought in succession make it obviously undesirable, to step-up
investment to the point when prices of essential goods come under further pressure.
27. Next year’s Budget has necessarily to be framed in the background of the
complex picture which I have just outlined. In order that both Government and
Parliament r may have adequate time to assess the situation fully, we have decided for
the present to come to the Honourable House with a Budget in which expenditures
have been restricted to resources in sight at present. At the same time, I must repeat,
that this is only an interim Budget presented primarily for obtaining Parliamentary
Appropriations for expenditure during the first four months of the next year in terms
of Constitutional requirements. As I mentioned at the outset, Government expect to
review the position shortly and bring forward such proposals for incurring additional
expenditure and raising resources for the purpose as may be necessary and feasible in
the present circumstances. At this stage, therefore, I shall merely indicate the basis on
which the present Budget has been framed.
28. Next year’s Revenue receipts at existing rates of taxation are estimated at
Rs.3071 crores being Rs.214 crores more than the current year’s Revised Estimates.
The major increase occurs under excise duties, namely, Rs.86 crores due mainly to the
expected offtake from the new oil refineries. Customs revenue is also expected to be
Rs.58 crores more mainly because of anticipated larger imports next year. Income tax
is not likely to show an improvement of more than Rs.15 crores because of the
inadequate growth of industrial production this year, particularly in the agro-based
7

industries. The rest of the increase occurs mainly under interest receipts, Rs.37 crores.
Of the total revenue receipts, Rs.370 crores will be transferred to the States as their
share of Central taxes and duties.
29. Credit has been taken for a market loan of Rs.350 crores next year.
Considering that the maturities next year are of the order of Rs.255 crores, this will
mean a net borrowing of Rs.95 crores as against Rs.81 crores this year. Some
improvement has been assumed in view of the fact that the Reserve Bank has so far
this year been a net seller of Government securities which is an encouraging feature.
30. Foreign loans other than PL 480 are placed at Rs.835 crores or 1115
million dollars gross which is significantly higher as compared to the current year’s
Revised estimates of 800 million dollars. The bulk of the non-project assistance of
900 million dollars pledged this year is expected to flow in next year. Further
non-project assistance and drawals therefrom should also be possible. The repayment
liabilities next year are about Rs.195 crores; thus giving a net of Rs.640 crores.
31. The rupee accruals in respect of PL 480 imports which are invested in the
special securities of Government are expected to amount to about Rs.285 crores.
Assistance of 50 million dollars on account of the wheat gifted by Canada has also
been taken into account.
32. Next year’s expenditure estimates include Rs.969 crores for Defence as
against Rs.942 crores in the Revised, thus showing a rise of Rs.27 crores which is
mostly accounted for by provision for normal increments and increased cost of stores
and purchases. Border Roads account for a provision of Rs.42 crores which is Rs.4
crores more than in the Revised.
33. The purchase and sale of foodgrains and fertilizers account for a net
expenditure of Rs.159 crores because of the subsidised sale of imported foodgrains
and fertilizers Rs.13 crores are also payable to the manufacturers of fertilizers as a
subsidy on the imported raw materials used by them. On the basis of the economic
cost to Government and the existing issue prices, the total food and fertilizer subsidies
to be borne by Government next year amount to about Rs.185 crores .
34. A provision of Rs.105 crores has also been made in the next Budget for
loans to, States to enable them to purchase and distribute fertilizers, seeds and pesticides
as against Rs.60 crores in the current year. Other provisions include Rs.13 crores for
the Food Corporation as against Rs.12 crores this year and Rs.37 crores for scarcity
relief assistance to States as against Rs.70 crores this year, both loans and grants.
35. Non-Plan grants to States and Union Territories next year will be Rs.241
crores of which Rs.141 crores are granted under the Finance Commission’s award and
Rs.16 crores in lieu of tax on Railway passenger fares. Non-Plan expenditure of the
Centre under developmental heads next year is estimated at Rs.183 crores as against
8

Rs.164 crores this year. The increase of Rs.19 crores occurs mainly under Education,
Scientific Research and Public Works. The total interest charges next year are estimated
at Rs.510 crores which is Rs.47 crores more than the Revised. The administrative
expenditure is placed at Rs.164 crores as against Rs.154 crores this year.
36. The need for economy has been taken into account in making the budgetary
provisions for next year on the expenditure side. Provisions for payment of interest
charges, transfers to States and Union Territories under the Finance Commission is
awards or similar arrangements or scarcity relief, assistance to neighbouring countries
and obligatory payments like pensions, etc. hardly offer any scope for reductions. The
increase in Defence expenditure next year has been restricted to the minimum
considered necessary. The increase in administrative expenditure has been held at
Rs.10 crores of which Rs.3 crores relate to Police and Rs.2 crores to tax collection
charges. I would, however, like to assure the House that the objective of the utmost
economy in expenditure consistent with efficiency will continue to be pursued as a
matter of the highest priority.
37. The resources for the Plan next year on the basis of the estimates just
mentioned and a number of miscellaneous items not mentioned here are placed at
Rs.1711 crores including Rs.189 crores to be found by public sector undertakings
from their own resources. Of these, Rs.535 crores have been allocated to the States for
their Plan schemes and the balance has been retained for the outlay on the Central
Plan including the Plan of the Union Territories.
38. The provision for Central assistance to States includes Rs.172 crores for
agricultural programmes and Rs.145 crores for irrigation and rural electrification
schemes. In addition, a provision of Rs.8 crores has been made for similar programmes
in the Union Territories Plan. The Central Plan also includes Rs.51 crores for agricultural
programmes and Rs.25 crores for the Agricultural Refinance Corporation, the land
mortgage banks debenture programmes and the Agro-Industries Corporations . Another
Rs.4 crores have been provided for transfer to States for building up agricultural
credit stabilisation funds. Thus, the Central Budget for the next year includes Rs.405
crores for programmes of agricultural importance. In addition, as already mentioned,
Rs.105 crores have been provided for giving fertilizer credits to States. The Central
Plan also includes a provision of Rs.28 crores for family planning. Honourable Members
would like to note that in keeping with the priority we attach to agriculture and family
planning, the requirements of both these as estimated at present have been provided
for even at this stage when a final view on next year’s Plan is not possible. For
other sectors, the tentative Plan provisions now being made are indicated in the
Budget documents.
39. Sir, I am well aware that the provisions which have now been included in
the Budget for the requirements of the various Public Sector projects, the States and
private industry through financial institutions are modest. At this stage, I can only say
9

that the budgeted provisions will be reviewed to make sure that essential programmes
do not suffer and quick results are obtained from investments already made or in
progress. The major circumscribing factor is the availability of resources and it shall
be our endeavour to explore all possible avenues of mobilising additional resources.
40. Our aspirations and hopes for economic well-being and a higher standard
of living for millions of our people lie in accelerating the tempo of development. But
this has to be done without generating further inflationary pressures, and on the basis
of a realistic assessment of the resources that can be mobilized in a non-inflationary
manner. Government’s energies will be directed towards attaining this objective in the
shortest possible time; and I propose to present a fuller picture of Government’s
budgetary as well as general economic policies at the time of the presentation of the
final Budget in the next Session of the Parliament. I hope and trust that in the course
of the debate on the present Budget, Honourable Members would have many
constructive suggestions to make about the future course of our policy. We, on our
part, shall give every consideration to the criticisms and suggestions offered so that
we can carve out a surer path out of our present difficulties. With this hope and
assurance, I commend this interim Budget to the House.
(March 20, 1967 )

10

