SPEECH OF SHRI PRANAB MUKHERJEE MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1984-85

Sir,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 1984-85.
2.
The Budget has been formulated against the background of strong recovery
in national income and agriculture, and an equally impressive improvement in our
balance of payments. These and other developments in the economy have been covered
in detail in the Economic Survey, presented to the House a couple of days ago. I shall,
therefore, be brief in reviewing the current economic situation.
3.
As the House is aware, the country had to go through two years of severe
drought and one year of indifferent monsoon during the period 1979-80 to 1982-83.
Foodgrains production, which had reached 132 million tonnes in 1978-79, declined to
110 million tonnes in the following year. It recovered to 133 million tonnes in 198182 but then declined again to 128 million tonnes in 1982-83 because of another severe
drought. The current year has seen a major breakthrough in foodgrains production,
and we are not only likely to recover lost ground, but also improve substantially on
the previous peak. Foodgrains production in 1983-84 is expected to exceed the target
of 142 million tonnes. Agricultural production as a whole is likely to increase by 9
per cent over the previous year. Honourable Members will agree that this is convincing
testimony to the soundness of our agricultural strategy and to the hard work of our
farmers.
4.
Industrial performance shows an improvement over the previous year, but
the recovery in industrial production still seems weak. Industrial growth in the current
year is likely to be about 4.5 per cent, compared with 3.9 per cent in 1982-83. For the
four year period after 1979-80, industrial growth will average slightly more than 5 per
cent. This is well below the potential of the industrial sector. We must aim at a
growth rate of 7 to 8 per cent in industry if we are to maintain high-rate of growth of
CDP and provide employment for our growing labour force in the years ahead.
5.
The national income growth in 1983-84 is likely to be in the range of 6 to
7 per cent. In the four years since the present Government took over, the average
growth rate in national income has been about 5.4 per cent which is higher than the
rate of growth in the first four years of any previous Plan. Per capita income in this
period will have risen at an average rate exceeding 3 per cent per year. This achievement
is all the more noteworthy when viewed against the background of a highly adverse
international economic environment, and-a severe drought.
1

6.
The years 1981-82 and 1982-83 were characterised by exceptionally low
rates of inflation. The annual rate of inflation which had reached a high of 21.4 per
cent in 1979-80 was brought down to 16.7 per cent in 1980-81 and further to only 2.4
per cent at the end of 1981-82. The annual rate of inflation at the end of 1982-83 was
6.2 per cent, which is unusually low for a drought year. But, there has been acceleration
in the annual rate of inflation in the current year despite an excellent crop. The initial
delay in the arrival of the monsoon and the high liquidity in the economy exerted
pressure on prices in the early part of the year. The favourable effects of a good crop
led to a decline in cereal prices after harvesting. However, this was largely offset by
sharp increases in prices of a few commodities such as pulses, certain edible oils,
rubber, tea and cotton because of both domestic and international factors. As a result,
the seasonal dip in prices, which normally occurs towards the end of September has
been weak.
7.
As the House is aware, the Government has taken several measures to
minimise the impact of the drought and to contain the price rise. Action was taken to
increase procurement, availability, and releases of sensitive commodities such as wheat,
sugar, and edible oils through the public distribution system. Steps were also taken to
mop up excess liquidity with the banking system and to curtail Government expenditure.
Exports of cotton and CTC teas were restrained in order to increase domestic
availability. Further measures will be taken as required to ensure that there is no
repetition of the experience of 1979-80, when prices were allowed to increase by over
21 per cent.
8.
Let me now turn to the external payments situation facing the economy.
In my budget speech last year, I had informed the House of the improvement that had
taken place in our balance of payments in 1982-83. I am happy to say that this
improvement has gained strength in 1983-84. The trade gap, which declined from
Rs.5800 crores in 1981-82 to about Rs.5500 crores in i982-83, is expected to decline
further in the current year. Receipts on invisibles account have remained buoyant and
the incentives for non-resident deposits have been highly successful. Our foreign
exchange reserves, Inclusive of IMF drawings, have increased by Rs.662 crores in the
current financial year upto 10th February.
9.
Our strategy for bringing the balance of payments under control, after the
sharp deterioration that occurred in 1979-80, has paid rich dividends. In view of the
improvement in our payments position, the Government has voluntarily decided not to
avail of the balance of 1.1 billion SDR under the Extended Fund Facility of the IMF.
While intervening in the debate on the IMF loan in this House in December, 1981, the
Prime Minister had this to say, and I quote:
“It does not force us to borrow, nor shall we borrow unless it is in the
national interest. There is absolutely no question of our accepting any
programme which is incompatible with our policy, declared and accepted
2

by Parliament. It is inconceivable that anybody should think that we
would accept assistance from any external agency which dictates terms
which are not in consonance with such policies.
This was true then, and it is true now.
10. Belying the prophecies of doom by many a self styled Cassandra, the
economy has emerged stronger as a result of the adjustment effort mounted by us.
None of the dire consequences that we were being warned about has occurred. We
have not cut subsidies. We have not cut wages. We have not compromised on Planning.
We have not been trapped in a debt crisis. We have not faltered in our commitment
to anti-poverty programmes or the welfare of our people. We entered into this loan
arrangement with our eyes open. We have come out of it with our heads high.
11. We hope that our decision to forgo the balance of the amount available to
us under the IMF loan would, in a small way, help the IMF to provide greater assistance
to other developing countries. I must also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the goodwill and mutual-understanding that has marked our relationship
with the IMF during the entire period of the EFF arrangement.
12. However, there can be no room for complacency. We must persist with
the policies that have brought about this favourable outcome. It is necessary to work
even harder to save imports in critical areas and to increase exports. Our exports, net
of oil, in the first seven months of 1983-84 increased by 9.9 per cent. This is a
reasonable performance considering that world trade has been stagnant for quite some
time. We would need to do even better in the future in order to meet the essential
import requirements of a growing economy, and to keep the debt service ratio at a
manageable level.
13. The Government has taken several steps in the last four years to mobilise
resources for public sector investment and to increase the rate of public savings for
financing the Plan. Apart from adjustment of the tax rates, the fiscal instrument has
been used to provide stronger incentives for savings in the form of financial assets.
Interest rates on deposits were also revised upwards with the same objective in view.
These policies have been highly successful and the inflow of funds in small savings as
well as time deposits has exceeded expectations. An important task of fiscal policy in
the years ahead is to strengthen this trend.
14. In considering the strategy for resource mobilisation we have to recognise
that while our tax rates are relatively high, the tax base is narrow. The evils of black
money and tax evasion also have to be reckoned with. The Government is fully
committed to come down heavily on tax evaders. At the same time, we must ensure
that, as far as possible, the tax system itself does not become a source of encouragement
for evasion. Simplification and rationalisation of the tax system must, therefore,
remain important objectives of our fiscal policy.
3

15. The Central public sector enterprises had shown a net profit of Rs.618
crores in 1982-83. Although a large number of public sector enterprises have continued
to show profits in 1983-84, their overall performance has been below expectations.
The erosion of profitability was largely due to losses incurred in a few sectors, such
as steel and coal. The Government has taken steps to improve their functioning. We
must ensure that capital is used more efficiently so that larger resources are available
for future expansion.
16. In order to fulfil our social commitments and protect jobs, Government
had to take over a large number of sick units and sustain them through injection of
fresh resources. While some of them have turned the corner, a large number of them
continue to incur losses. The time has come to undertake a careful review of the
performance of sick units in the public sector with a view to reducing the drain on our
resources. This Government proposes to do. Economic viability must be the principal
test for the survival of an enterprise.
17. The growth of deposits with the banking system in the current year has
substantially exceeded their requirements of funds for credit expansion. This has, in
the short run, resulted in some excess liquidity with the banking system. In this
situation, and in order to mobilise some resources for public investment, it is considered
desirable to introduce another financial instrument with broadly the same characteristics
as longer term time deposits with banks. Under the scheme, which will be called the
“National Deposit Scheme”, certificates of deposits with a maturity of four years can
be purchased from designated outlets. The investor will have the option to en-cash
these deposits any time after one year. The interest rate will be 10.5 per cent if these
deposits are held for four years, and 10, 9 and 7 per cent if these are held for three,
two and one year respectively. Interest from these deposits will be eligible for tax
exemption upto the full limit of Rs.10,000/- under Section 80L of the Income-tax Act.
The target of receipts under this scheme is Rs.500 crores over a period of time. I
should clarify that this is a temporary scheme, and will be discontinued after this
target is reached or earlier, if monetary developments so warrant.
18. Pursuant to the recommendations of the High Level Committee on financial
institutions set up by the Government last year, it has been decided to make certain
changes in the “convertibility clause”. In view of the increases in capital costs of
projects and the investment limit for the de-licensed sector, the threshold for exemption
from convertibility clause is being raised from the existing level of Rs.1 crore to Rs.5
crores.
19. Further, in the case of non-MRTP companies, convertibility clause will
not be stipulated where the holding of equity by all financial institutions in such a
company exceeds 26 per cent. In the case of M11TP companies/large houses, however,
the existing limit of 40 per cent will continue. In order to encourage investment in
“No Industry” districts there will be complete exemption from convertibility clause in
4

respect of units proposed to be located in these districts. The functioning of nomineedirectors of institutions on the boards of assisted companies is also being revamped.
Detailed guidelines on these and other related aspects are being issued separately.
20. The Industrial Development Bank of India has been providing liberal
financing facilities for modernisation of industry. The IDBI’s scheme for this purpose
was recently extended to all industrial units and assistance under this scheme upto
Rs.4 crores is being provided at a concessional rate of interest of 12.5 per cent. In
order to reduce financing costs of modernisation schemes, it has been decided that the
rate of interest under the IDBI scheme for loans upto Rs.4 crores will be reduced to
11.5 per cent until further notice. Weak units will be provided assistance upto this
amount at an even lower rate of interest of 10 per cent.
21. As the House is aware, the Government has been giving consideration to
the desirability of a change in the financial year. As I informed the House last year,
I invited the views of the State Governments on this proposal. The response has been
generally favourable. In order to examine suggestions received from State Governments
as well as trade and industry, and to work out the modalities for effecting a change in
the financial year, I propose to set up an expert committee, which would include
representatives of Central Government, State Governments, Reserve Bank of India,
Comptroller and Auditor General and some non-official members. This committee
will be requested to submit its report by the end of September, 1984.
22. I shall now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1983-84 and the Budget
Estimates for 1984-85.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1983-84
23. The House will recall that the Central sector Plan outlay for 1983-84 was
fixed at Rs.13,870 crores. This was to be financed to the extent of Rs.8,390 crores
from the budget and Rs.5,480 crores through the internal and extra-budgetary resources
of the public sector enterprises. Despite erosion in the internal resources of certain
public sector enterprises, it has been my endeavour to ensure that the total Plan outlay
during the year is not adversely affected. The Central Plan outlay in 1983-84 is now
estimated at Rs.14,059 crores. This has been made possible by an increase in the
budgetary support by Rs.1,007 crores over the Budget Estimates.
24. Budgetary support for the Posts and Telegraphs Plan has been increased
by Rs.203 crores. The Railway Plan outlay has been stepped up by Rs.100 crores
with an additional budgetary support of Rs.54 crores. In the Transport and
Communications sectors, I have provided additional funds for Space projects like
INSAT, and extension of television coverage. To maintain the progress of the
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, the budget provision has been augmented by Rs.250 crores.
For Chemicals & Fertilizers, the enhanced allocation of Rs.133 crores is largely due
to the fall in internal resources and change in the pattern of financing. In the Energy
sector, coal projects get additional funds of Rs.30 crores to expedite on-going projects.
5

To improve the capital base of the Industrial Development Bank of India, a special
provision of Rs.130 crores has been made. Rupees 100 crores have been set apart for
the new rural landless employment guarantee programme launched during the current
year. I have also increased the provision for welfare of scheduled castes/ tribes and
backward classes and important social sectors like health and family welfare.
25. The Central assistance for States’ and Union territories’ Plans has been
increased by Rs.392 crores from Rs.4,462 crores to Rs.4,854 crores. This includes
advance Plan assistance of Rs.190 crores to States affected by failure of monsoon
particularly in the first half of the current year. Additional Plan assistance of Rs.82
crores has been provided to the State of Assam, a large part of which is for relief and
rehabilitation of the riot victims in that State.
26. Utmost care has been taken to contain the non-Plan expenditure. There
were, however, certain unavoidable commitments. Additional provision of Rs.400
crores has been made for ways and means advances to State Governments and Technical
Credits under rupee-trade agreements. The short-term loans to States for agricultural
inputs have been stepped up by Rs.110 crores. There is an increase of Rs.300 crores
in loans to State Governments, as their share of small savings will be higher on account
of higher collections. The second half of the current year witnessed floods, cyclones
and hailstorm in as many as 15 States. An additional non-Plan grant of Rs.150 crores
has been provided for the relief of distress on account of these calamities.
27. Further, I am providing additional non-Plan assistance amounting to Rs.500
crores to States. I shall refer to this later while dealing with the State Plan outlay for
next year. Out of this loan of Rs.500 crores, an amount of Rs.400 crores would help
the States to clear part of their deficits of 1982-83.
28. The provision for Defence has been increased from Rs.5, 971 crores to
Rs.6, 350 crores in the Revised Estimates. The interim relief and bonus sanctioned to
Government employees in the current year is estimated to cost about Rs.280 crores in
respect of all the departments of the Government. Subsidy on imported and domestic
fertilizers will go up by Rs.250 crores to Rs.1,048 crores as the consumer price of
fertilizers was reduced in June 1983. During the current year, because of financial
difficulties, certain public sector undertakings, particularly Heavy Engineering
Corporation, National Textile Corporation and Delhi Transport Corporation, will be
requiring larger non-Plan assistance than provided in the Budget Estimates. It has
also been decided to extend the subsidy scheme for Calcutta Port and Haldia Channel
dredging up to the end of next year.
29. Revised Estimates also include additional provision of Rs.502 crores for
subscription towards our higher quota in the IMF. This, however, will have no net
impact on the budget as payments for quota subscriptions are matched by corresponding
receipts. Taking these and other variations into account, the non-Plan expenditure in
6

the Revised Estimates is placed at Rs.24,773 crores against the Budget Estimates of
Rs.21,984 crores.
30. Coming to receipts, the Budget Estimates of receipts from income-tax
and customs duties are likely to be achieved. Corporation tax receipts will be higher
by Rs.203 crores due to larger payments by oil companies. Union excise duties are
also estimated to be Rs.85 crores higher mainly due to larger collection of cesses on
crude oil and coal. The Centre’s tax revenue, after paying the States’ share of taxes,
is estimated at Rs.15,700 crores as against the Budget Estimates of Rs.15,460 crores.
31. Under non-tax revenues, the dividend from Railways is likely to be Rs.127
crores less than the Budget Estimates. This decrease will, however, be more than
offset by increases under other heads and total non-tax revenue in the current year is
expected to show an improvement of Rs.130 crores over the Budget Estimates.
32. Under capital receipts, I am happy to inform the House that the net
collections under small savings during the current year may amount to Rs.2,200 crores
against the Budget Estimates of Rs.1,700 crores. This is a welcome response to the
incentives provided for small savings in the current year’s budget. The repayment of
Technical Credits is expected to be Rs.1,150 crores as against Rs.800 crores assumed
in the Budget. The receipt, net of outgo, will be Rs.350 crores against the Budget
Estimates of Rs.200 crores.
33. The receipts from special deposits of non-Government provident funds
and the like are estimated to be Rs.190 crores higher than the Budget Estimates.
Taking into account the deposits of surplus funds of oil sector, additional recoveries of
ways and means and short-term advances to the State Governments and other variations,
capital receipts in the current year are estimated at Rs.15,965 crores as against the
Budget Estimates of Rs.12,656 crores.
34. Total receipts are thus estimated to go up from Rs.33,250 crores to
Rs.36,929 crores. This will leave a budgetary deficit of Rs.1695 crores for the current
year as against the Budget Estimates of Rs.1586 crores. This excludes the special
loan assistance of Rs.400 crores provided to States for clearing their overdrafts at the
end of the previous year 1982-83. I am sure the House will agree that despite
unavoidable budgetary pressures, we have been able to keep the deficit within prudent
limits.
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1984-85
35. Honourable Members will recall that when our Government took office in
January 1980, an important task before us was to revitalise the planning process and
to give a new thrust to the programmes of development. I am happy to say that, in the
last four years, we have been able to achieve an unprecedented increase in the tempo
of public investment.
36. For 1984-85, the approved Plan outlay of the Centre, States and Union
territories will be Rs.30,132 crores as compared to Rs.25,480 crores in 1983-84. The
7

Central Plan outlay for 1984-85 is Rs.17,351 crores, which represents a step up of 25
per cent over the approved Plan outlay of Rs.13,870 crores in 1983-84.
37. The Plan outlay for the States and Union territories is placed at Rs.12,78l
crores as compared with the final approved outlay of Rs.11,678 crores in 1983-84.
Central assistance for the Plans of States and Union territories will be Rs.5050 crores
as against Rs.4462 crores in 1983-84 Budget Estimates, representing an increase of
13.2 per cent over the allocation made for the current year.
38. Within this aggregate, Plans of individual States show a varied picture.
Some States have managed their finances well; they have been able to raise additional
resources and effectively utilise these to implement adequately sized Plans, providing
development and growth to their people. Unfortunately, some States, for reasons of
their own, have used their resources for various other purposes; they have not invested
their resources, including additional resources mobilised, for development and have
also resorted to large overdrafts on the RBI.
39. With a view to assisting even such States, various facilities and
opportunities were provided from time to time. At the beginning of the Sixth Plan
itself, recovery of outstanding advance assistance amounting to Rs.1412 crores was
postponed. This was done to enable States to start with a clean slate. However, State
overdrafts again grew, and in June 1982, I decided to clear States’ closing deficits of
the previous year with a medium term loan of Rs.1743 crores. RBI also doubled the
ways and means limits available to the States. Again last year, while presenting the
budget, I announced an increased level of Central assistance. All these measures were
taken primarily to assist States to readjust their financial affairs and to be able to
implement State Plans of adequate size.
40. Unfortunately, despite these measures, some States continued to rely
heavily on overdrafts even after March 1982. Their proposed deficits at the end of
March 1984 would have harshly affected their Plan sizes if these deficits were adjusted
against next year’ s Plan, as per normal practice. In considering the ways of overcoming
this problem, I have found myself in a predicament. On the one hand, no Finance
Minister of the country can remain unconcerned about the size of a State’s Plan. On
the other hand, if assistance is extended to defaulting States, the well-managed States
can legitimately complain that they have not got their just rewards from the Centre for
their better performance.
41. In the past few weeks, discussions were again held with the Chief Ministers
of States whose overdrafts with the RBI were high. Several State Governments have
agreed to take the necessary measures to improve their financial position and to reduce
their reliance on overdrafts. On my part, I have agreed to take further steps to provide
additional assistance to States in order to protect their Plans as far as possible. In
doing so, I have been particularly conscious of the need to keep up the momentum of
anti-poverty programmes. Central assistance is also being further increased. With
8

this, the aggregate assistance during the Plan period will amount to Rs.17,790 crores
as against Rs.15,350 crores envisaged in the Plan document. Further, as I mentioned
earlier, I have made an additional provision of Rs.500 crores in the Revised Estimates
for 1983-84. This special assistance would enable these States to clear part of their
overdrafts with the RBI. States have also been informed that closing deficits, upto the
permissible ways and means limits from the RBI, will not be adjusted from next
year’s Plan resources.
42. For those States who have managed their finances well, I am working out
a suitable scheme to provide some additional assistance to them in 1984-85. This is
only just and appropriate.
43. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am sure that the House will agree with me that, despite
severe resource constraints of its own, the Central Government has done the maximum
that it can to solve the States’ problems. The rest, however, is upto them.
44. Altogether, in the Sixth Plan period, the public sector Plan at current
prices will be over Rs.110,000 crores. This compares with Plan expenditure of
Es.46,700 crores in the preceding five years, which of course, include three years of
“non-Plan” launched by the previous Government. In real terms too, the Sixth Plan
will constitute a massive increase over the outlays provided for in any previous Plan.
This, Mr. Speaker, is the measure of achievement of this Government in accelerating
the pace of development in the current Plan period.
45. In the last four years, the present Government introduced a number of
schemes for the benefit of the weaker sections of the society, particularly in the rural
areas. These include the Integrated Rural Development Programme, the National
Rural Employment Programme and the two new programmes announced by the Prime
Minister on 15th August, 1983, namely, the Rural Landless Employment Guarantee
Programme and the scheme for providing self-employment opportunities to the educated
unemployed. Each of these programmes is designed to create opportunities for
employment and income generation for particular target groups, while also creating
productive assets.
46. In formulating the next year’s Plan we have provided the maximum support
to these and other programmes that benefit the rural poor directly. The total allocation
for various programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development would be Rs.932 crores,
which is nearly double the amount of Rs.480 crores provided in 1983-84. For the
IRDP an allocation of Rs.216 crores is being provided, which is to be matched by the
States. The number of beneficiaries under the programme in 1984-85 is estimated at
over 3 million. For the NREP, the outlay for 1984-85 is Rs.230 crores, which will
again be matched by the States.
47. The allocation for Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme,
which seeks to provide employment for 100 days in a year to at least one member of
9

every rural landless family, is being stepped up to Rs.400 crores in 1984-85 as against
a provision of Rs.100 crores in 1983-84. This, together with the NREP, will provide
550 million man-days of work in rural areas in 1984-85. An allocation of Rs.25 crores
is being made for the programme for providing self-employment opportunities to the
educated unemployed. As the House is aware, the budgetary provision under this
programme will be used as capital subsidy against loans to be given by banks. I may
add that for these two new programmes, depending on the progress of expenditure,
more funds will be provided during the course of the year as necessary.
48. In the Plan for 1984-85, Rs.243 crores have been earmarked for the
accelerated rural water supply programme. The States on their part are expected to
provide Rs.364 crores for this purpose under the minimum needs programme. Over
50,000 problem villages are expected to be provided with drinking water facilities
during 1984-85.
49. The programme for integrated child development services is an important
part of our efforts to help women and children in the backward areas, urban slums and
tribal areas of our country. This programme is already in operation in 820 blocks. By
the end of 1984, the scheme will become fully operational in an 1000 identified
blocks. A provision of Rs.36 crores has been made for this scheme. A total allocation
of Rs.78 crores is being provided for various schemes of the Department of Social
Welfare in 1984-85.
50. The provision in the Central Plan for the various programmes benefiting
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and other backward classes has been increased
to Rs.209 crores in 1984-85 compared to Rs.176 crores only in 1983-84. Plan outlay
for the programmes in education and culture has been substantially stepped up to
Rs.204 crores in 1984-85 as against Rs.155 crores in 1983-84. Likewise, the Plan
outlay for health and family welfare programmes has also been stepped up by nearly
32 per cent from Rs.460 crores in 1983- 84 to Rs.605 crores in 1984-85. The family
welfare programmes will cover an additional 20 million persons.
51. These and other socio-economic priorities of the Government are reflected
in the 20-Point Programme which is being vigorously implemented. The total amount
allocated to the Programme in the Central Plan is Rs.4038 crores, which is an increase
of about 47 per cent over the current year’s provision. Inclusive of the outlays to be
provided by the States and Union territories, the total provision for the 20-Point
Programme will be Rs.11,858 crores, representing nearly 40 per cent of the total
annual Plan outlay of the Centre, States and Union territories.
52. An important source of strength for the economy has been the tremendous
strides made in the agricultural sector. The next year’s Plan will continue the high
priority given by the present Government to the development of this sector. Thus, the
total outlay for the various programmes of the Ministry of Agriculture will be Rs.758
crores compared to Rs.556 crores in the current financial year. The outlay includes
10

Rs.38 crores for the National Oilseeds Development: Project which together with the
on-going programmes, visualises an additional production of 9.4 lakh tonnes during
1984-85 itself.
53. To further strengthen the country’s infrastructure, higher allocations are
being provided for power, coal, railways and ports. The total provision for various
power projects adds to Rs.1764 crores, which represents a 44 per cent increase over
1983-84. The allocation for projects of the Department of Coal is Rs.1310 crores as
against Rs.1076 crores in 1983-84, and the target for coal production is 152 million
tonnes in 1984-85. The provision for the Railways in 1984-85 is Rs.1650 crores,
which is 23 per cent higher than the current year. It is expected that the revenue
earning traffic to be carried by the Railways will increase to 245 million tonnes in
1984-85. An allocation of Rs.201 crores is being made for the development of ports,
including Rs.27 crores for the deepening of the Madras harbour.
54. An outlay of Rs.3127 crores is being provided for petroleum. This includes
a sum of Rs.2685 crores for the programmes of exploration and production, and Rs.443
crores for the various schemes of refining and marketing. The target for production of
crude oil in 1984-85 is about 30 million tonnes. A provision of Rs.200 crores is also
being made for a gas pipeline project for supply of Bassein gas to new fertilizer
projects to be set up at Bijaipur, Jagdishpur, Aonla, Babrala, Shahjahanpur and Sawai
Madhopur.
55. Higher allocations have been provided for steel, non-ferrous metals, paper,
cement and several other sectors, which are important for country’s industrial
development. I would also like to draw the attention of the House to the programmes
for the development of science and technology, conservation of natural resources, and
improvement of the environment in the Plan for 1984-85. The successful positioning
of INSAT-IB in a geocentric orbit in August last, testifies to the excellent work done
by our scientists, engineers and technicians. It is also a matter of pride to us that India
has joined a select group of countries which have permanent scientific stations in the
Antarctica. India has also achieved the distinction of being the only developing country
to be given the status of ‘pioneer investor’ by the Convention on the Law of the Sea,
giving us the right to exploit the mineral resources of the deep sea beds.
56. Finally, I should mention that the incentive schemes for better performance
in selected areas, initiated in 1983-84, will continue in 1984-85 also. As the House is
aware, these schemes are designed to improve the functioning of the electricity boards,
and provide further impetus to the programmes for small and marginal farmers, rural
water supply schemes, environmental improvement in urban slums, construction of
field channels in command area development projects, and adult education for women
and elementary education for girls. A lumpsum provision of Rs.200 crores is being
made for this purpose. Lest the Honourable Members take me to be a magician, who
can do so much with so little, I hasten to clarify that the incentive scheme is designed
11

to provide additional resources linked to performance for specified schemes. There
are, of course, also separate substantial allocations for each of these schemes.
57. I have only briefly touched upon the main priorities and objectives of the
Annual Plan for 1984-85. Further details are available in the budget documents.
58. In order to provide the maximum possible outlay for the Plan, I have
taken special care to ensure that non-Plan expenditure is kept at the minimum. However,
certain increases are necessary and unavoidable. I should also add that the estimates
of receipts from and payments to State Governments take into account the
recommendations contained in the interim report of the Eighth Finance Commission.
I have already kept the House informed of this. The final report of the Commission
is now expected by the end of April, 1984.
59. I have provided Rs.6800 crores for Defence expenditure next year against
the Revised Estimates of Rs.6350 crores. I am sure the House will agree that the
requirements for Defence have to be met fully to protect the security of the country.
Interest payments next year are estimated at Rs.5600 crores against Rs.4850 crores in
the current year. The borrowings are largely for financing our developmental efforts,
and the increase is due to the success of our policies for mobilising savings. A provision
of Rs.850 crores has been made for food subsidy. The requirement for subsidy on
indigenous and imported fertilizers is placed at Rs.1080 crores. Export promotion
and market development have been allocated Rs.530 crores.
60. A lumpsum provision of Rs.300 crores has been made in 1984-85 for
payment of additional instalments of dearness allowance, pensionary relief, etc. to
Central Government employees. Including these and, inter alia, provisions which are
in the nature of adjustments, total non-Plan expenditure in 1984-85 is esimated at
Rs.26,066 crores against Rs.24,773 crores in Revised Estimates for 1983-84.
61. Turning to receipts in 1984-85, the gross tax revenues at existing levels of
taxation are estimated at Rs.22,993 crores compared with Rs.20,946 crores in the
Revised Estimates. The States’ share of taxes in 1984-85 is estimated at Rs.5739
crores as against Rs.5246 crores in the current year, which is an increase of nearly
Rs.500 crores. The net, tax revenues of the Centre will thus be Rs.17,254 crores
compared with Rs.15,700 crores in the current year. The dividend from Railways and
Posts and Telegraphs will be higher by Rs.106 crores than the Revised Estimates for
1983-84. Interest receipts and repayment of loans by public sector undertakings and
State Governments will also be higher.
62. Receipts from market loans are placed at Rs.4100 crores against Rs.4000
crores in the current year. Small savings collections are estimated at Rs.2400 crores
against Rs.2200 crores in the current year. External assistance net of repayments is
estimated at Rs.2089 crores compared with Rs.1902 crores. Next year’s Budget also
includes a receipt of Rs.200 crores from the National Deposit Scheme to which I have
12

referred in the earlier part of my speech. Taking into account these and other variations
in receipts, the total receipts in 1984-85 are estimated at Rs.40,501 crores. These
receipts include the effect of the changes in fare and freight rates of the Railways.
The total expenditure is placed at Rs.42,536 crores. The overall budgetary gap at
existing rates of taxation will thus be Rs.2035 crores.
63. I have taxed the patience of the House enough. Let me now turn to other
tax proposals.

PART B
64. In framing these proposals, I have tried to take into account the realities
of the economic situation to which I referred at the beginning of my speech. While
doing so, I hope I have not been entirely unmindful of a certain forthcoming event
which is of importance to all of us in this Parliament.
65. Mr. Speaker, Sir, my first proposal relates to the non-corporate incometax sector. I propose to revise substantially the entire rate structure relating to personal
taxation. The present rate of tax in the first slab of taxable income ranging from
Rs.15,001 to Rs.20,000 is 25 per cent. The House will recall that this rate was brought
down last year from the then prevailing level of 30 per cent. I now propose to reduce
this rate further to 20 per cent. Relief has been allowed at all income levels above
Rs.20,000 also. The maximum marginal rate of tax on incomes over Rs.1 lakh is
being reduced from 60 per cent to 55 per cent. The new rates in some illustrative
slabs will be as follows: in the income slab of Rs.25,001 to Rs.30,000, the new rate
will be 30 per cent as against 35 per cent at present; in the income slab of Rs.50,001
to Rs.60,000, the new rate will be 45 per cent as against 50 per cent at present; and in
the income slab of Rs.70,001 to Rs.80,000 the new rate will be 50 per cent as against
55 per cent at present.
66. The above proposal will provide relief at all levels of incomes. Taken
with the increase in the standard deduction introduced last year, I expect this measure
will provide substantial relief in particular to the fixed income groups. The revised
tax schedule will provide a relief in tax of Rs.281/- to a taxpayer with an income of
Rs.20,000, which is 20 per cent of the tax payable by him earlier. For an income level
of Rs.30,000, the relief will be Rs.844/- or 16.67 per cent of the tax payable under the
old structure, and at income level of Rs.50,000, this relief will be 10 per cent of the
tax payable.
67. The loss of revenue in the proposed rate schedule, assuming no change in
the number of taxpayers and the assessed incomes in different income slabs, is
calculated at Rs.180 crores. However, lowering of the tax rates should normally be
expected to lead to an increase in the coverage of taxpayers in different tax slabs and
also better tax compliance. Taking these factors into account, I have assumed a net
13

revenue loss of Rs.59 crores only. This loss is entirely attributable to tax relief provided
to the fixed income groups. As far as business and professional incomes are concerned,
I have assumed that the reduction in the rates will encourage better compliance and
reporting and that this will partly cover the revenue loss.
68. This proposal, Mr. Speaker, Sir, in a way continues the tax rationalisation
programme that was started by my Party in 1974; carried forward in 1976 and further
reinforced after we came back to power in 1980. The present tax structure has also
been brought down to a level which I regard as realistic and entirely appropriate. I
hope this measure will have a salutary effect on our tax culture and will induce the
maximum number of taxpayers to come forward and voluntarily declare their true
incomes.
69. At the same time, it is necessary to simplify tax administration and make
it more responsive to the needs of the taxpayers. One essential feature would be the
effort to complete assessments within the shortest possible time. As the Hon’ble
Members are aware, the scope of the summary assessment scheme covers incomes
upto Rs.1 lakh. Only a percentage of cases with incomes in this range is being
scrutinised, the selection of such cases being on random sampling basis. The target
for 1983-84 is to complete 85 per cent of the summary assessments workload. I have
instructed the Income Tax Department to further speed up the assessments.
70. For some years, the Income-tax Act has contained provisions empowering
the Central Government to acquire immovable property having a fair market value
exceeding Rs.25,000. This power is exercisable in situations where the declared
consideration for transfer of the property is less than the fair market value of the
property. To eliminate unproductive work in handling a large number of relatively
small value cases and also taking into account the rise in market prices I have modified
the provision to say that this power will be exercised only in cases where the fair
market value exceeds Rs.50,000. As a further simplification it is being provided that
the prescribed statement will have to be filed before the registering officer only in
cases where the value of consideration for the transfer exceeds Rs.25,000 as against
Rs.10,000 at present.
71. With the reduction in rates and expeditious disposal of assessments, I
believe there can now be no excuse for any leniency to be shown to those who abuse
our laws. Such cases will necessarily have to be dealt with severely. In order to
discourage tax avoidance and tax evasion, I am also introducing some further measures.
In all cases where the annual turnover exceeds Rs.20 lakhs or where the gross receipts
from a profession exceed Rs.10 lakhs, I am providing for a compulsory audit of
accounts. This is intended to ensure that the books of account and other records are
properly maintained and faithfully reflect the true income of the taxpayer. I am also
proposing that loans or deposits of Rs.10,000 or more shall be taken or accepted only
by crossed cheque or bank draft.
14

72. I find that the existing provisions of the Income-tax Act provide that no
suit to enforce any right relating to any property held benami can be instituted in any
court by a person claiming to be the legal owner unless he has declared the Income
from such property in any return of income or the value of such property in any return
of net wealth or furnished a notice in this behalf in the prescribed form to the Incometax Officer. Such return or notice can at present be given at any time before the suit
is filed. With a view to curbing the practice of benami holding of property I am
proposing that it will henceforth be obligatory in all cases to give notice to the
Commissioner of Income-tax in the prescribed form within one year of the acquisition
of the property. This amendment will enable the Department to initiate appropriate
action in respect of such benami acquisition of property well before the limitation for
such action expires.
73. Having dealt with the non-corporate sector, I now turn my attention to the
corporate sector. The tax rates for this sector are not being changed. I am however
providing one facility. Last year, while raising the surcharge payable by companies
from 2.5 per cent to 5 per cent, I had given companies the option to make deposits of
the additional surcharge with the Industrial Development Bank of India. I am now
further providing that companies can henceforth exercise this option in respect of the
entire amount of the surcharge payable by them. These resources will flow back to
the corporate sector, and will be available for modernisation. In the earlier part of my
speech, I have already referred to the decision to reduce the interest rates on loans
upto Rs.4 crores being extended by IDBI under the soft loan scheme.
74. Representations had been received from various quarters that the ceiling
on the deductible amount of managerial remuneration as contained in the Income-tax
Act is low and should be raised. I am glad to inform the House that having regard to
the changes in the managerial remuneration introduced by the Department of Company
Affairs, I am also raising the ceiling limits for managerial salaries from Rs.5,000 to
Rs.7,500 per month. The ceiling in respect of perquisites will however remain
unchanged.
75. Some relaxations are also being provided to those engaged in the business
of growing, and manufacturing tea. The existing provisions provide exemption from
tax only in respect of subsidy received for replantation or replacement of tea bushes.
I am extending this tax exemption to cover subsidy received for other approved schemes
relating to rejuvenation and consolidation of areas. I hope this measure will further
lend support to our scheme for increasing production of tea.
76. My next proposal, I believe, will be welcomed by a large number of
people. Investors presently can receive dividends and interest on debentures without
deduction of tax at source, if they furnish an exemption certificate from the Incometax Officer or alternatively file a declaration to the effect that their income for the year
is below the exemption limit. To reduce paper work and avoid inconvenience to small
15

investors, I propose to provide that widely-held companies may, henceforth, pay interest
on debentures and dividend income upto Rs.1,000 without deduction of tax at source
provided that the payment is made by an account payee cheque or a bank draft.
77. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I notice that certain provisions of tax laws are being
misused by a section of the taxpayers. I had occasion last year to deal at some length
with taxation of charitable and religious trusts and institutions. I find that some of
these trusts and institutions are trying to circumvent the investment pattern for trust
funds laid down by the Finance Act, 1983. It is necessary to ensure that all such trusts
and institutions strictly conform to the prescribed investment pattern and that such
income or property is not used for providing benefit to the settlors, trustees, etc. I,
therefore, propose to provide for taxation of the Income of defaulting trusts and
institutions at the maximum marginal rate of income-tax.
78. While on this subject, I would like to refer to a tendency noticed to create
private trusts which carry on business. To curb such practice, I propose to provide
that where such trusts have profits and gains of business, the entire income of the trust
will be charged to tax at the maximum marginal rate, an exception being made only in
the cases where the trust is created by will for dependent relatives.
79. Another undesirable practice noticed is the tendency of some corporate
bodies to make large contributions to the so-called welfare funds. I further understand
that utilisation of these funds is discretionary and subject to no discipline. I am,
therefore, providing that deductions will be available only in respect of contributions
to such funds as are established under statute or an approved provident fund,
superannuation fund or gratuity fund. I am making this change with retrospective
effect to avoid unnecessary litigation.
80. Last year, I liberalised the scheme related to export turnover. I propose to
continue it and watch its operation for a longer period of time.
81. Last year, I had also referred to a large variety of exemptions and deductions
that had been built into our tax system over time. While each deduction by itself may
have its own merits, the aggregate effect was to complicate the tax administration and
to provide loopholes for tax avoidance or tax evasion, as also for litigation. I had,
therefore, initiated a process of review and, where necessary, doing away with
concessions which had outlived their utility. I intend to carry this process further.
82. Our experience has shown that an expenditure related concession leads to
a tendency to inflate expenditure and hence it should have no place in our tax system.
Therefore, I propose to withdraw all weighted deductions as are available under the
different provisions. The expenditure actually incurred will, of course, continue to
qualify for deduction. Only the benefit of weightage will no longer be available.
83. I am also withdrawing the exemptions available under sections 33B, 35C,
8OCC, 80D and 80E of the Income-tax Act. These deductions, notwithstanding their
16

apparent laudable objectives have either been open to misuse or have benefited only
a few. The revenue involved is marginal. I am also reducing the quantum of exemption
available under Sections 80M, 8ON and 80-0.
84. Now, I intend to announce a few concessions in respect of the Wealth-tax
Act. Hon’ble Members, I am sure, will be happy to hear that the monetary ceiling of
exemption in respect of one house owned by a taxpayer is being increased from the
present level of Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2 lakhs. This is being done to take into account the
increase in market value. I am also proposing to raise the exemption limit in respect
of specified financial assets from the present level of Rs.1,65,000 to Rs.2,65,000.
Together with separate exemption of Rs.35,000 available in respect of units of the
Unit Trust of India and proposed to be extended to deposits under the National Deposit
Scheme, the aggregate exemption in respect of the value of specified financial assets
will rise to Rs.3 lakhs as against the present ceiling of Rs.2 lakhs. Honourable Members
would recall that in the earlier part of my speech, I had referred to the success in
mobilising savings in the form of financial assets; I hope that this change will give
further impetus to it.
85. The other changes proposed by me in respect of direct taxes are of relatively
minor nature and I would not like to take the valuable time of this House by elaborating
them.
86. After adjustment of the gain to revenue on account of withdrawal or
modification of certain concessions, my proposal in regard to Income-tax will lead to
a net loss of Rs.75 crores, of which the loss to the Centre would be Rs.36.32 crores
and the loss of the States would be Rs.38.68 crores.
87. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I shall now deal with my proposals in the area of indirect
taxes. Here my main objective has been to provide further impetus to the growth of
Indian industry through tariff adjustments and substantial relief in excise duties in
carefully selected areas. I have also kept in view the need to reduce prices of certain
items for consumers and contain the rate of inflation in the economy. I am sure the
Honourable Members will not grudge, if in doing so, I have also taken a little care of
Government revenues.
88. My principal proposal relating to customs duties is with regard to auxiliary
duty of customs. The levy imposed on an annual basis since the 1973 Budget is
proposed to be continued upto the 31st of March, 1985. I also propose to raise, with
certain exceptions, the present effective rates by 5 percentage points. I am excluding
from the proposed increase essential items like fertilizers, bulk petroleum products
such as kerosene and high-speed diesel oil, and also newsprint. Fuller details of these
proposals are available in the Budget papers. This proposal is expected to yield an
additional revenue of Rs.241.73 crores in a full year.
89. The present customs duty on crude petroleum of Rs.9.50 per metric tonne
(which is being collected by way of auxiliary duty) was fixed in 1973. Without
17

affecting the domestic prices of petroleum products, I propose to raise the duty on
crude to Rs.100 per metric tonne. The revenue gain from this measure will be Rs.132.76
crores. This duty, increase is to be absorbed by the oil companies without their having
to raise consumer prices on this account.
90. The current rates of Import duties on iron and steel Items were fixed a
few years back and they are now out of line with the requirements of Indigenous
industry. I propose to raise the basic customs duty on different items of iron and steel
(other than stainless steel) by 5 percentage points or 10 percentage points, depending
upon the existing rates of duties. I also propose to levy a total customs duty of 20
percent ad valorem on stainless steel melting scrap, which is presently exempt from
customs duty. These measures are expected to yield an additional revenue of Rs.84.
20 crores.
91. I also propose to increase the import duty on zip fasteners and parts thereof,
magnetic tape and petroleum specialities, namely petroleum jelly, sodium petroleum
sulfonate and liquid paraffin. Details of the proposals are available in the Budget
papers. The revenue gain in these proposals would be of the order of Rs.5.32 crores.
92. In order to promote exports in the important sector of gems and jewellery,
customs duties leviable on a number of gem and jewellery processing and manufacturing
machines are proposed to be reduced from the respective existing rates to 40 per cent
ad valorem. The gem processing machines would enable significant reduction in
processing losses and also improve overall quality and productivity. Similarly, I also
propose to reduce customs duties on specified machines used in packaging of food
articles as well as by meat and food processing industries from the respective existing
rates to 40 per cent ad valorem. This measure is expected to encourage export of food
items in value-added form and also in consumer packs instead of in bulk. The revenue
sacrifice involved in the above proposals is of the order of Rs.5.24 crores.
93. With the advancement in machine tool technology, CNC machines are
progressively replacing conventional machine tools due to their higher productivity
and accuracy. To enable the indigenous machine tool manufacturers to offer CNC
machine tools on competitive terms, I propose to reduce the customs duty on CNC
systems to 35 per cent. The revenue sacrifice is of the order of Rs.0.82 crore.
94. To enable the paper industry to obtain its raw materials at reasonable
prices and to relieve the pressure on our forest resources, I propose to totally exempt
from customs duties wood chips for making pulp for the manufacture of paper or
paper board. On similar considerations, I propose to reduce the duty on wood pulp
imported for manufacture of paper from the existing levels to 30 per cent. These
measures involve revenue sacrifice of the order of Rs.1.10 crores.
95. Certain changes in the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, relating to
warehousing, etc. and in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 are also proposed. The details
of these proposals have been given in the Budget papers.
18

96. Sir, coming now to my proposals in respect of excise duties, my main
objectives are to minimise the effects of inflation, lessen scope for tax avoidance and
evasion, give a boost to selected industries suffering from demand recession, and
ensure better utilisation of the capacity and investment already created.
97. I propose to continue upto 31st March, 1985 the levy of special excise
duties at the existing rates and with the existing exemptions.
98. My first proposal for relief is in respect of khandsari sugar. I propose to
fully exempt khandsari sugar from the levy of excise duty. I am taking this measure
in view of the labour-intensive character of this industry, and to provide further
opportunity for growth of employment in this Industry. The abolition of excise duty
will also help this industry to pay better price to cane growers, and will give relief to
a large number of khandsari units located in far-flung rural areas. The revenue sacrifice
involved in this proposal is Rs.16.42 crores. Khandsari, I am told, is also better for
health. If as a result of this measure, the health of the nation improves, I hope the
credit will flow to me and not to my distinguished colleague, the Health Minister!
99. Hon’ble Members would recall that excise duty was levied on electricity
as a revenue measure in the 1978 Budget. The net proceeds from the duty collected
on electricity are wholly distributed to the States. It is proposed to abolish the excise
duty on electricity leaving it to the State Governments to tap this source, to whatever
extent and in whatever manner they like. This will give to the States one more area
for resource mobilisation. To give the States some time to take appropriate action,
this abolition will be effective from 1st October, 1984.
100. I also propose to provide substantial relief to the textile industry with a
view to making cloth cheaper. Hon’ble Members may recall that in the 1982 and
1983 Budgets, excise duty was reduced to encourage the production of blends with
the desirable proportions of polyester. Such fabrics are becoming increasingly popular
with the people. As a further measure of relief in this area and with the overall
objective of making such fabrics available at lower prices, I propose to reduce the
total excise duty on polyester-cotton blended yarn containing more than 40 per cent
but less than 70 per cent polyester to Rs.5 per kg. The existing rates of duty on such
yarn vary generally from Rs.7.5 per kg. to Rs.22.5 per kg. depending on the extent of
polyester-cotton mix. Under my proposal all blends over 40 per cent but below 70 per
cent of polyester will pay the same reduced rate of duty., For similar blends of polyester
and viscose, the excise duty will get reduced to Rs.10 per kg. from the present rates
which generally vary from Rs.11.25 per kg. to Ra.22.50 per kg. The revenue sacrifice
on these accounts is estimated at Rs.33.25 crores in a full year.
101. Blended fabrics have also received my attention. The excise duty on
polyester-cotton blended fabrics containing more than 40 per cent but less than 70 per
cent polyester will be reduced to 2 per cent ad valorem. The Incidence of duty on
such fabrics at present varies from 7.5 per cent to 17.8 per cent ad valorem. This
19

concession would cost the exchequer Rs.26.50 crores in a fun year. I also propose
that this duty at 2 per cent ad valorem be collected as additional excise duty in lieu of
sales tax. As Hon’ble Members are no doubt aware, proceeds of additional excise
duties on textiles go to the States
102. These changes in the duty structure on polyester-cotton blended yarn and
polyester-cotton blended fabrics will, for a 87:33 blend, reduce the duty incidence by
about Rs.3.30 per square metre on a fabric carrying a wholesale price of about Rs.25
per square metre, and a retail price of Rs.35 to 40 per square metre. This duty reduction
will enable the industry to sell such fabrics at reduced prices.
103. I also propose to provide relief on cotton fabrics which still constitute a
major share of the total production of cloth in the country. I propose to reduce excise
duty on cotton fabrics of less than 51 counts and of assessable value not exceeding
Rs.5 per square metre. Such fabrics at present pay duty of excise at rates varying
from 2.38 per cent to 3.56 per cent ad valorem in the case of composite mills.
Concessional rates of duty are allowed for Independent processors processing
powerloom and handloom fabrics. I propose to fully exempt handloom and powerloom
fabrics of the above varieties processed by Independent processors. The rate of duty
for composite mill fabrics is also being reduced to 1 per cent ad valorem retaining
more or less the present differential between the independent processors and the composite mills. This duty would be in the nature of additional excise duty in lieu of
sales tax and will entirely go to the States. Such fabrics are mostly consumed by the
weaker sections of society. The benefits of the reduction should become available to
them in the form of lower prices. This proposal on cotton fabrics would entail a
revenue sacrifice of Rs.28.40 crores.
104. I hope, my proposals would also help the textile Industry. The Industry
should benefit through Increased demand that lower prices would generate.
105. Cotton yarn and cellulosic spun yarn in the form of cross reel hanks are
finding increasing use in the handloom sector. In the Handloom Year, I propose to
reduce the duty incidence on such yarn supplied to registered Handloom Co-operative
Societies or to organisations set up or approved for the development of handlooms, by
about 50 per cent. This would involve a loss of Rs.3 crores to the exchequer in a full
year.
106. In order to recoup some of the revenue loss flowing from the above package
of measures in respect of the textile industry, I propose to increase the incidence of
additional excise duty in lieu of sales tax from 7.5 per cent to 10 per cent on manmade fabrics of assessable value exceeding Rs.25 per square metre. This increase
will not apply to those blended fabrics in respect of which duty is being reduced. The
impact will be on costlier fabrics which are consumed mainly by the more affluent
sections of society. They should not mind this. On this account, the exchequer will
gain by Rs.27 crores in a full year and this, too, would accrue entirely to the States.
20

107. I also propose to reduce the duty on shoddy blankets and other similar
blankets made from shoddy yarn processed by composite mills by about 7 per cent.
Such shoddy blankets if processed by independent processors will be wholly exempt.
The revenue loss on this account would be Rs.1 crore in a full year.
108. Another industry needing urgent attention is the paper industry. This
Industry has been passing through a difficult phase troubled by rising cost of raw
materials and other inputs. My proposals aim at encouraging the production of paper
and paper board and preserving scarce natural forest resources. I have already referred
to the proposed exemption from customs duty on import of wood chips and wood pulp
for paper making. As a further measure of relief, I propose to reduce the basic excise
duty on printing and writing paper and also kraft paper produced by large paper mills
by Rs.425 per metric tonne, and corresponding concessions are being given on the
duty leviable on such paper when unconventional raw materials are used in their
manufacture. Simultaneously, the range of permissible unconventional raw materials
is being expanded.
109. No concession for use of unconventional raw material is presently available
in the case of paper boards. I propose to-reduce the basic excise duty payable on
paper boards manufactured from at least 50 per cent unconventional raw materials
from the present general level of 10 per cent ad valorem + Rs.1430 per metric tonne
to R * s.560, Rs.900 or Rs.1120 per metric tonne depending on whether the clearances
of paper and paper board from such paper mills in the preceding financial year did not
exceed 3,000 tonnes, 7,500 tonnes or 16,500 tonnes respectively. For larger paper
mills using unconventional raw materials, the rate of basic excise duty on paper boards
is being reduced to 7 per cent ad valorem + Rs.925 per metric tonne.
110. My proposals relating to the paper Industry would entail a loss of Rs.33
crores in excise duties in a full year. Along with the customs duty exemptions on
Import of wood chips and wood pulp, this package is expected to provide substantial
fiscal support to the development of indigenous paper industry and improve the
availability of paper at reasonable prices.
111. Hon’ble Members may recall that certain time bound concessions were
given in October, 1983, in respect of certain specified commodities. Having regard to
the industry’s response to that measure which was intended to stimulate production by
generating incremental demand, I propose to continue the concession for one year
with certain modifications.
112. In the case of commercial vehicles and three-axled vehicles, the concession
will be continued but the extent of duty concession granted in October, 1983 is being
reduced by 21 percentage points. I propose to remove some models of light commercial
vehicles from the purview of the exemption in order to establish parity among all
models of such vehicles in the matter of the rate of excise duty. These proposals
would entail a revenue loss of Rs.45 crores in a full year.
21

113. I propose to continue the concessions in the case of refrigerators, deep
freezers and parts of refrigerating appliances, etc. storage batteries and domestic
electrical appliances. The total revenue sacrifice on these items would be to the tune
of Rs.19 crores.
114. In the case of tyres for buses and trucks and tyres for use off-the-road, I
do not propose to continue the concession granted in October, 1983 as there is no
further case for this concession in view of the price increases announced by this
industry. However, as a measure (if rationalisation and in order to reduce scope for
tax evasion, I propose to switch over by and large to a system of specific rates of
duties from the ad valorem rates.
115. Production of china and porcelain tableware over the last few years has
been showing signs of stagnation and the capacity utilisation has been declining.
With a view to providing relief to the industry, I propose to reduce the basic excise
duty from 30 per cent to 15 per cent on these items. This would entail a revenue loss
of Rs.1.5 crores.
116. With summer not very far away, I would like to help the Hon’ble Members
in keeping their tempers cool. I propose to reduce basic excise duty on table fans
from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and on ceiling fans of a diameter not exceeding 107 cms
from 15 per cent to 7.5 per cent. I also propose to reduce the basic excise duty on
evaporative type of coolers, including desert coolers, from 40 per cent to 30 per cent
ad valorem. These proposals would involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.5.10 crores.
117. As a rationalisation measure, I propose to reduce the basic duty on winding
wires from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and increase the basic duty on copper wire rods
by Rs.1300 per metric tonne. On an overall basis, these changes will neither result in
a loss nor gain in revenue.
118. As Hon’ble Members will remember, many reputed artists had published
an appeal inviting our attention to piracy. As I “just can’t write these names off” I
propose to exempt sound-recorded cassettes wholly from excise duty. In view of the
upward revision of customs duty on magnetic tapes, the revenue loss on this account
is expected, by and large, to be made up.
119. As a general measure of relief I propose to fully exempt laundry soap
manufactured by KVIC units and to reduce basic excise duty from 10 per cent to 5 per
cent on certain mass consumption items such as Imitation jewellery, stainless steel
utensils, glass chimneys for lanterns, high efficient wood burning stoves, umbrellas
and saccharine. The revenue sacrifice involved in these concessions is Rs.1.13 crores.
120. Hon’ble Members may recall that an excise duty relief scheme to encourage
higher production is in operation for the past two years. I propose to continue the
scheme for one more year.
22

121. Hon’ble Members would also recall that in the last Budget, I had
rationalised the tariff relating to iron and steel items. This year, I have undertaken a
similar exercise in respect of non-ferrous metals. The tariff entries are being revised
on a more scientific basis. These changes as in last year would be brought into effect
from a subsequent date. Tin then, the present effective rates of duty would continue.
122. I propose to increase the additional excise duty in respect of cigarettes,
The present ratio between basic excise duty and additional excise duty is being altered
to 1.75:1. This measure will result in the transfer of Rs.42.89 crores from the basic
excise duty account to the additional excise duty account in the next financial year,
and thus increase the accrual to the States. There will be a corresponding reduction
in the amount allocated to basic excise duty. The total incidence of excise duties on
cigarettes will remain unaltered.
123. There are some other minor proposals which do not have much revenue
significance. These include readjustment of duties in some cases and deletion of
some tariff items which have remained fully exempted for a long time.
124. In the light of the experience gained in the working of the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal and the Customs. Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal,
some amendments are proposed to be carried out in the laws relating to them. These
are mainly of an administrative nature. I do not propose to take the time of the House
over these proposals.
125. Mr. Speaker, Sir, with the phenomenal increase in central excise revenue
from about Rs.100 crores in 1953-54 to about Rs.10,100 crores in 1983-84, the Central
Excise Tariff has also substantially grown. I think, it is time to make a comprehensive
review of the tariff as it has developed over the last three decades with a view to
rationalising it. This would require a detailed study which can best be done only by
a technical study group. I propose, therefore, to appoint such a Group.
126. The proposals that I have presented will yield additional revenue of
Rs.465.41 crores in customs duties and Rs.33.10 crores in excise duties. There would
be a transfer of Rs.43.64 crores from the basic duty account to the additional duty (in
lieu of sales tax) account. The concessions and reliefs aggregate Rs.7.26 crores on the
customs side and Rs.222.43 crores on the excise side. The net yield from customs
duties is Rs.458.15 crores. The net loss from excise duties comes to Rs.189.33 crores
out of which Centre’s share would be Rs.148.95 crores and States’ share would be
Rs.40.38 crores. This takes into account the States, share from additional excise
duties in lieu of sales tax to the extent of Rs.52.31 crores. The accrual to the central
exchequer for the additional tax effort in a full year would be Rs.309.20 crores.
127. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the 1st March, 1984 will be laid on the Table of the House in due
course.
23

128. I had earlier stated that the budgetary deficit at the existing rates of taxation
would be Rs.2035 crores. The tax measures proposed now, taken together with reliefs
and concessions, are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.272.88 crores to
the Centre. This leaves an uncovered deficit of Rs.1762 crores. It has been my
endeavour to keep the budgetary deficit to a relatively low figure and I am sure the
Hon’ble Members would agree that this order of deficit is appropriate to our
circumstances. I hope that the low deficit, combined with my proposals for boosting
production and lowering prices, will have a salutary effect on the inflationary
psychology in the economy.
If I may, at this point, quote from Kautilya’s Arthashastra:–
A´ÉÆ BÉÖEªÉÉÇiºÉàÉÖnªÉÆ ´ÉßÉËr SÉÉªÉºªÉ n¶ÉÇªÉäiÉ*
cÉºÉÆ BªÉªÉºªÉ SÉ |ÉÉYÉ& ºÉÉvªÉäSSÉ ÉÊ´É{ÉªÉÇªÉàÉÂ**
129. Four years ago, my distinguished predecessor, while presenting the first
Budget of the present Government, had expressed our firm resolve to repair the damage
and restore the country’s economy to the path of stability, growth and social justice.
Mr. Speaker, we have kept that promise.
130. I commend this Budget to the House.
[February 29, 1984]

24

