SPEECH OF SHRI C.D. DESHMUKH MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1956-57
Sir, I rise to present the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Government of India for the year 1956-57.
2.
I have had the privilege of presenting so far five annual Budgets of the
Central Government, which reflected to a very large extent the financial implementation
of the First Five Year Plan. There has been considerable transfer of revenue resources
from the Central Government to the States, both on the recommendation of the Finance
Commission and as statutory or discretionary grants. Moreover, loan assistance given
by the Central Government to the States towards their capital expenditure has been
progressively increasing. The Central Government has been enabled to do this by the
discriminating approval of Parliament to the Taxation measures put forward by
Government from year to year, as also by the judicious augmentation of our financial
resources by the creation of credit supplemented, and indeed facilitated, by the assistance
so generously and understandingly extended to us by friendly foreign countries or bodies
and international institutions. In the context of our Plans the Central Government’s
budgets have thus come to possess a significance far exceeding that suggested by the
respective constitutional spheres of the Central Government and the States.
3.
Thanks to the encouraging response of the people of this country themselves,
in addition to external assistance, the First Five Year Plan will, by the end of the current
financial year, have been fulfilled generally to a satisfactory extent. I shall not take up
the time of the House to recount the main features of the results achieved, the more
important of which have already been referred to in the President’s address. It is enough
to state broadly my view that by means of the First Five Year Plan we have laid sound
foundations for a more massive superstructure in building up the country’s economy.
4.
The present Budget relates to the first year of the Second Five Year Plan
which will during this Session be submitted to the Parliament for approval. A draft
outline of it has already been published, and in due course the House will have an
opportunity of discussing it fully, At this stage only a few general observations by me
are called for so that the background to the Budget that I am presenting may be
understood.
5.
The Plan envisages a total outlay of Rs. 4,800 crores on development and
investment in the Public sector. It has not been possible to satisfy all the pressing demands
from the Central Ministries and from the States. I can only say that, considering all the
circumstances, a Plan of Rs. 4,800 crores, with possibilities of unavoidable marginal
increases, and corresponding financial resources not fully within sight, is in my opinion
1

(which is shared by most of the leading economists of the country) about the utmost
that the country can, with realism, adopt. It is indeed a bold and ambitious Plan that we
shall be undertaking, requiring great and sustained efforts, and it will be, therefore, a
matter of pride and gratification if we can successfully implement such a Plan within
the Five Year period. If some Central Ministries and States are disappointed, I can only
assure them that the Planning Commission has tried to equalise dissatisfactions at the
margin.
6.
A plan for a five year period has necessarily to be flexible. It has to be
adapted from time to time to changing circumstances. There are uncertainties inherent
in any forecast or preview of the future and it is unrealistic to claim any immutability
about allocations, targets and the implicit assumptions in the Plan. The plan has to be
regarded as a framework or a map which indicates in which directions development is
to proceed, in what measure and through what techniques of resource mobilisation.
Such a map may not be complete in all respects. For some purposes, even a five year
framework or map is not sufficient and it may be necessary to think in terms of a longer
perspective of, say, 15 or 20 years. Each step forward in the development of the economy
brings into view new horizons or at least throws up new problems, and we have constantly
to redraw the map in the light of developments within the economy and to adjust the
perspective in which we are projecting our programmes.
7.
A plan is not merely a programme of expenditure to be incurred by
Government. It is a co-ordinated effort by all sections of the community to attain certain
results through the use of defined resources and by defined stages. At each stage in the
process there must be a balance between demands and supplies not only in the aggregate
but also by sectors. Real resources must move in conformity with the plan, for, as is
well known, even a small bottleneck in the availability. of a vital raw material, or of
power, or of transport, or of foreign exchange, can have adverse repercussions upsetting
the whole programme. A great deal of work of a technical character will be continuously
necessary in order to ensure the co-ordinated development and use of resources as the
plan proceeds. From this point of view, no less than from the point of view of the
uncertainties I mentioned earlier, it is essential to view the plan as a broad framework
within which more concrete and detailed plans for each year may be worked out and
implemented.
8.
The Second Five Year Plan is a bolder step forward in the direction of
developing the economy. It involves an increase in the rate of investment from the
present level of about 7 per cent of the national income to something like 12 per cent.
This order of effort is feasible only if the necessary restraint in the matter of consumption
is forthcoming on the part of all sections of the community, each according to its capacity.
With a rising national income keeping ahead of the growth in population there need be
no question of a reduction in the existing average living standard. This has to rise. That
is the very object of planning. Neverthless, there is in the short term a choice between
an increase in consumption and an increase in investment which would bring in larger
2

returns in the future. To the extent that a plan succeeds in drawing upon unutilised
resources, it makes possible a simultaneous increase in the production of investment
goods as well as consumption goods. It is not necessary, therefore, in an underdeveloped
economy to regard an all round reduction in consumption as a condition precedent to an
increase in investment, although it is possible that the current consumption standards of
the more fortunate sections of the community will be unfavourably affected. There is,
all the same, need for relative restraint, difficult as this is in a country which starts with
exceedingly low levels of consumption. And fiscal policy has to be, geared to this
objective. Whatever the rise in money incomes, the community’s expenditure on
consumption must be limited to the level which buys off currently available supplies of
consumer goods at more or less constant prices.
9.
I shall not at this stage review the entire financial prospect in relation to the
Plan. I must, however, stress the fact that a plan of the dimensions proposed will require
the utmost effort by way of mobilising the resources needed. The financial resources
obtained from abroad can only help within limits and at the margins. This help is
undoubtedly, of great significance and value, and it is most welcome. However, the
bulk of the effort has to come from within the country. In this context a progressive tax
system, that is, a system which augments tax resources proportionately or more than
proportionately to the increase in national income has an important role to play. It is
important also to encourage and mobilise the savings of the community with far more
intensive official and non-official efforts than have hitherto been made. As both these
can only be achieved progressively, the implementation of the Plan has to be phased
with care.
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
10. A correct appraisal of current economic trends and situations is notoriously
difficult, but as far as such an appraisal is feasible, we should, in my view, be justified
in believing that we are embarking upon our Second Plan in reasonably favourable
economic climate. In retrospect it seems clear that economic conditions in the country
changed for the better in 1953 and 1954 and the Indian economy achieved greater strength
and vigour in the course of 1955. The decline in agricultural prices which set in after
August, 1953, was halted by May, 1955 and over the remaining part of the year an
upward trend was registered. In most industries production reached significantly higher
levels, and, aided by favourable factors, the performance in regard to agricultural
production was satisfactory. The rate of planned outlay was stepped up considerably
without apparently releasing inflationary pressure. Aggregate demand and supply tend
to balance at a higher level. The slack in the economy which came into evidence after
the collapse of the Korean boom has virtually disappeared. The First plan has thus
strengthened the economy a great deal and stage is now set for more rapid development.
11. In 1954-55 the overall index of agricultural production reached 113.9, almost
on level with the preceding year when it had touched the record figure on 114.1. The
output of foodgrains during the year amounted to 65.8 million tons, which, though a
3

little lower than in the previous year, was yet in excess of the Plan target by just over 4
Million tons. The easy supply position of foodgrains enabled the Government to remove
the last remnant of controls on the 18th March, 1955, when the inter-zonal restrictions
on movement of wheat were removed.
The general crop prospects for 1955-56 are considered to be satisfactory. They
would have been better still but for the calamitous floods in the North and the devastating
cyclones in the South that occurred during the year.
12. The production of commercial crops showed further improvement in the
current year. Oilseeds output at 5.9 million tons and raw cotton at 4.3 million bales
have exceeded their targets under the First Five Year Plan by 4 lakhs tons and about 1
lakh bales respectively. The production of sugar touched the record level of 15.9 lakh
tons as compared to 10.01 lakh tons in 1953-54, while that of jute, which remained
depressed during the last two years, has shown a significant increase of about 12 lakh
bales during the 1955-56 season as compared to the last.
13. The upward trend in industrial production has persisted through 1955. A
revised index of industrial production is now available. The new series has a larger
coverage-88 items as against 35 items in the old interim index. According to this series
the index of industrial production(1951=100) for the first 10 months of 1955 works out
at 125.7 as against 112.9 for the whole of 1954. This represents an increase of some 11
per cent over the preceding year. This increase in production was shared by almost all
the important industries. The output of finished steel at 1.26 million tons was higher
than the record of 1.243 million tons achieved in 1954. The production of mill cloth
which stood at 5,087 million yards in 1955 was 89 million yards higher than the
production of 1954 and exceeded the target fixed under the First Five Year Plan by 387
million yards. The production of handloom cloth has also increased considerably during
the year and at 1,450 million yards was the highest since independence. Cement
production during the year reached 4.5 million tons, again the highest since 1947. In
jute, chemicals and paper too, the performances were high. Considerable strides have
also been made by the engineering industry.
14. Special steps are being taken to plan and execute large scale development
of the chemical industry in diverse fields. Manufacture of paper and pulp from bagasse
is under investigation. An expert committee has recently been appointed to go into the
question of existing capacity for the manufacture of different types of machine tools
and to recommend measures required for the rapid development of this basic industry.
The National industrial Development Corporation has in hand a number of projects
including the establishment of heavy foundries, forges and gear-cutting and structural
fabrication shops. These will lay the foundations of the heavy machine-making industries.
The two major producers of steel have undertaken substantial expansion of their capacity
which will relieve the shortage of steel during the Second Five Year Plan. Licences
have also been given during the year to raise cement output to 11.59 million tons in the
next five years.
4

15. Special measures were taken during the year for the promotion and
development of small industries. A National Small industries Corporation has been set
up and four regional Small industries Service institutes opened. A number of schemes
for the development of various small industries in co-operation with the State
Governments have been approved. Technical assistance to help small industries in
improving output has been extended and special experts are being brought in from
abroad to help in this task. A scheme for setting up industrial Estates in various important
centres in the country is under implementation. Financial assistance on a greatly enhanced
scale is also being given through the State Governments. The development of the Khadi
and village industries and handicrafts continued to receive systematic assistance from
Government through grants and loans to the respective Boards and State Governments.
16. Industrial enterprises in the public sector have also advanced to higher
levels of performance. The Sindri Fertiliser Factory has exceeded the planned target by
producing 3,22,000 tons of ammonium sulphate during 1955. The Hindustan Cable,
Factory which began production in September, 1954, has stepped up its output
considerably and during the current year is expected to exceed the target of production
of 470 miles of cables per annum envisaged for this factory. The Penicillin Factory
started working in 1954 and has already left far behind the planned target of manufacture
of 4.8 million mega units. The Machine Tool Factory at Bangalore and the integral
Poach Factory at Perambur have commenced production.
Government have decided to increase the production capacity of the D.D.T. factory
in Delhi, which commenced production only in 1955, to 1,400 tons and also to set up a
second factory in Travancore-Cochin with a similar capacity. Among the more important
now projects that win be taken up during the coming year is the setting up of a Heavy
Electrial Equipment Factory in the public sector for the manufacture of electric
generators, transformers, switch gears, turbines for river valley projects and traction
equipment for railways. The House is aware of the creation during the year of the
Ministry of Iron and Steel to deal exclusively with the setting up of steel plants in the
public sector. The final project report for the first of the three steel plants which it has
been decided to set up, viz., that at Rourkela, has recently been approved and work at
site is progressing satisfactorily. Decision on the project report for the second plant at
Bhilal has been taken and here too, a Project Division set up at the site has been making
fair progress. Arrangements in regard to the third steel plant at Durgapur are progressing
satisfactorily and meanwhile, a field office, headed by an administrator, has been
established.
17. It is evident that the industrial base of the economy is being broadened year
after year, and to this progress the private as well as the public sector has made a
significant contribution.
18. The downward trend in wholesale prices which began in 1953 and gathered
momentum in, 1954, was halted by May 1955 when the wholesale price index reached
5

a low of 342. Since then the index has been rising continuously and in December 1955
it reached 368.4, more or less on par with the level in December, 1954. The prices of
food articles advanced from 276.1 in May to 323.7 in December and of industrial raw
materials from 3b6.4 to 438.3. On the other hand, prices of manufactured articles
remained virtually unchanged over the year. The fact that prices in general did not
record any net rise over the year as a whole is significant in the context of the considerable
expansion that has occurred in money supply with the public which recorded a rise of
about 200 crores or 11 per cent during 1955 as against a rise of about 120 crores in
1954.
19. The movement of wholesale prices is reflected in the cost of living. The
all-India index of cost of living moved down from 97 in December 1954 to 92 in May
1955, mainly due to a fall of about 7 per cent in the food index. By October, 1955, the
general index had again moved up to 97. Later figures indicate that cost of living indices
have moved up in the last quarter of the year, in keeping with the general trend of
wholesale prices. The average level of 1955 as a whole, however, is lower than that for
1954.
20. Government took several measures to arrest the downward trend of
agricultural prices which caused some anxiety early last year. Purchases of wheat and
coarse grains were made at selected centres and larger exports of several agricultural
commodities were permitted. These measures, together with the increased tempo of
development, arrested the fall in prices, and an upward trend is now in evidence. In
order to prevent an undue rise in prices as a precautionary measure Government have
been releasing stocks of wheat for sale at selected centres. These price movements only
high-light the importance both of Government keeping a continuous watch on the price
level and also holding at its disposal sizeable stocks of foodgrains on which it can
operate. A little countervailing action in time may save more extensive and varied
measures later.
21. There is another aspect of the problem which may be mentioned in this
context. Experience has shown that measures for imparting relative stability to
agricultural prices cannot be fully effective without properly organised and integrated
facilities for credit and marketing. Accordingly, in the light of the findings of the Rural
Credit Survey Committee, an integrated programme of co-operative development
covering all important aspects of rural economic life, viz., credit, marketing, processing,
warehousing and storage has been formulated. The main features of this programme
are the participation of the States in the share capital of the co-operative institutions at
all levels, re-organisation of the agricultural credit structure with larger organised primary
units and strong Central and Apex Banks, organisation of marketing societies closely
linked with credit co-operatives establishment of warehouses provision of better storage
facilities to co-operatives and the setting up of institutes or schools for the training of
co-operative personnel. The Government and the Reserve Bank have already
6

implemented a number of recommendations of the Rural Credit Survey Committee in
this respect. Thus the Imperial Bank of India has already been converted into the State
Bank of India and the Reserve Bank of India Act has been amended so as to enable them
to expand and augment credit facilities in rural areas. Only with progressive
implementation of the Committee’s recommendations will the requisite institutional
framework for an effective application of policies in relation to agriculture be established.
22. Notwithstanding the progress achieved in different sectors of the economy,
the employment situation in the country remains a matter of concern. Several ad-hoc
employment surveys in different parts of the country have been carried out, but they
cannot easily be used to assess the overall situation or assist in formulating policies and
plans for meeting it. The measure of unemployment and under-employment in an
undeveloped economy presents difficult problems of definition and procedure. The
Central Statistical Organisation and the National Sample Survey have been devoting
some attention to these problems, but it will be some time before comparable and
comprehensive data on a continuing basis become available. Meanwhile, from the rather
inadequate data furnished by the employment figures, it would appear that unemployment
in the urban areas is increasing. The number of persons on the live registers at the
various Employment Exchanges rose from 6.1 lakhs at the beginning of the year to 6.92
lakhs at the end, i.e., by about 13 per cent. This increase in registrations may however
be due in part at any rate to greater tendency or readiness to register, as in part it is also
due to some movement of people from rural to urban areas. However that may be the
need for stepping up the pace of development and for diversifying the economic structure
of the country is obvious.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
23. Honourable Members will recall that when we started the First Five Year
Plan we anticipated a large deficit in our overall balance of payments. But it has not
materialised to the extent we originally feared. Due very largely to the great increase in
our food production, which has resulted in a very substantial reduction in our food
imports, as wen as to the aid we have received from foreign countries over these years,
the total reduction in our sterling balances during these five years has been about Rs. 150
crores only. Lately, the improvement in the domestic economy has made itself felt
somewhat in our external trade. The country’s balance of payments on current account
for the first nine months of 1955 showed a surplus of Rs. 25 crores and the year as a
whole may show a surplus of about Rs. 35 crores as compared with a deficit of Rs.4
crores in the previous year.
24. The level of our sterling balances reflects the overall balance of payments.
At the beginning of the year 1955, these stood at Rs. 731 crores and at the end at Rs.
735 crores. That they have risen only by Rs. 4 crores as against the much greater surpluses
on current account is due to a substantial deficit in capital account. The House will
recall that India repurchased her obligations from the International Monetary Fund to
the extent of Rs. 22.2 crores in 1954. A further sum of Rs. 19.3 crores was repurchased
during 1955, reducing India’s liability to the Fund to about Rs. 6 crores only.
7

25. Our dollar position has also improved. During the first three quarters of
1955 there was a substantial surplus on current account of Rs. 31 crores as against Rs.
3 crores in the corresponding period of 1954. As a result of the improvement in the
dollar balance of payments, India made a net contribution of $ 53 millions to the Central
Reserve in 1955 as compared with a net withdrawal of $ 15 millions in 1954. During
the year further progress was made towards liberalisation of dollar imports. This is in
line with the policies followed generally by members of the Sterling area. Further
reduction of the discrimination against dollar imports or liberalisation of dollar payments
will obviously depend on the overall position of the Central go1d-dollar reserves.
26. The improvement in the payments position was achieved at a higher level
of trade than in the preceding year. The total value of imports during 1955 was higher
by Rs. 28 crores as compared with 1954. Exports recorded an even larger increase, the
actual figure being Rs. 41 crores. Of the items which have contributed to the general
increase in exports, special mention may be made of vegetable oils, jute manufactures,
raw cotton and shellac.
27. Despite the satisfactory payments position at present, the projected increase
in the pace of development in the country will necessarily put a heavy strain on our
payments position in future. Government are taking active measures to promote exports.
Export promotion Councils and Commodity Boards have been set up, greater emphasis
is being laid on the value of standardisation and quality control and participation in
international fairs and exhibitions is being increased. The institution of an Export Credit
Guarantee Scheme is under consideration and a Committee has recently been appointed
to formulate proposals in this regard. In spite of all this, there is little doubt that, if the
Second Five Year Plan proceeds according to schedule, not only shall we not be able to
achieve any surplus in our external accounts but we are also likely to be faced with
fairly substantial deficits. These deficits may be greater than they otherwise would
have been because we have to contend with certain adverse factors. Tea prices have
fallen and export trade in our other major items, jute and cotton textiles is becoming
increasingly competitive. We have therefore to take urgent and effective steps to
modernise and rationalise these industries, so as to make them capable of withstanding
foreign competition. Our import requirements on the other hand must necessarily
continue to rise as the tempo of our development programme increases. It is in this
context that the importance of making all-out efforts to encourage export industries and
otherwise to save or earn foreign exchange becomes apparent.
28. During the year under review, we have not taken any loan from the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 1ndia’s net total borrowings
from the Bank during a period of six years remain at about $ 125 millions, of which
$ 64 millions have actually been drawn so far. However we expect the Bank to play a
still more significant part in the financing of the foreign capital requirements of the
Second Five Year Plan. In order to enable it to assess our requirements and to determine
what projects in the Plan it could finance, we have invited the Bank to send a Mission
8

to visit us and we expect that it will be here shortly. Another development in the foreign
financial field is the establishment of the International Finance Corporation which will
start functioning during the course of the next few months and which, we as a member
country hope, will add to the flow of further funds to this country.
29. India continued to receive economic assistance from friendly countries,
mainly from the U.S.A., Canada, Australia and New Zealand. The total amount of foreign
aid estimated to be utilised from April, 1951, to March, 1956, is of the order of Rs.200
crores, the total authorisation of funds so far being Rs.300 crores. For the year 1955-56,
a sum of $ 50 millions has been authorised by the U.S. Government as development
assistance to India, of which it has been agreed that $ 37.5 millions or its rupee equivalent
will be a loan. The Government of Canada provided during 1955-56 an amount of $ 13
millions, as usual, and a special allocation of $ 7 millions for the NRX Reactor for the
Atomic Research Station at Bombay. The Government of Australia have agreed to provide
an additional 1000 wagons and some equipment for the All-India Radio at a cost of
approximately Australian £ 1.8 million. Similarly, the Government of New Zealand
have intimated that an additional amount of £ 400, 000 would be available for being
utilised on dairy development schemes. Assistance from the Ford Foundation for the
projects undertaken in the previous years was continued. Under the Colombo Plan, we
a: e also providing assistance to some of our neighbour countries. In the course of 195657, the value of external assistance expected to be received by India under the Colombo
Plan, including assistance from the U.S.A. is expected to amount to Rs.75 crores. We
shall be spending approximately Rs.1.5 crores on aid to other countries. We shall also
be receiving from the Government of the USSR a credit equivalent of about Rs.10
crores during the year in respect of the supply of plant and equipment for the Bhilai
Steel Project. Such assistance from outside, freely given and received without inhibitions,
plays a valuable role in our endeavours to develop our economy, and I feel sure that it is
greatly appreciated by the vast majority of the people of this country.
30. The Government of India have continued, as in the past, to maintain their
close economic link with the Sterling Area. India was represented at the Commonwealth
Finance Ministers’ Conference in Istanbul in September last when common problems
facing the Sterling Area were discussed and the need for the continuance of sound
internal economic policy was recognised. The Conference also reviewed the difficulties
that had been facing sterling in the recent past and determined on measures to restore
its position in the markets of the world.
31. We have also continued to follow our traditional policy of close co-operation
with our neighbouring countries in economic matters. We participated in the AsianAfrican Conference in Bandung in April, 1955, where a number of resolutions were
passed dealing with economic matters designed to promote economic co-operation among
the countries in Asia and Africa. In accordance with the resolutions of that Conference,
we have appointed a liaison officer to examine and pursue policies conforming to these
9

resolutions. We also agreed to grant a loan of Rs. 20 crores to the Government of Burma
to help them tide over certain temporary difficulties.
32. This review of the last year of the First Five Year Plan shows how far the
country has progressed during the period covered by it. What has been achieved in the
past few years gives reason for hope that given the will and determination to put up
with the necessary sacrifices, the further progress of the country can be assured. The
spell of stagnation has been broken. Total national income over the First Five Year Plan
period will have increased by some 18 per cent as against the 11 per cent increase
envisaged in the Plan. The productive capacity of the economy has been significantly
enlarged. And these results have been achieved consistently with the maintenance of
economic and financial stability. In the course of the First Plan, there have been
inflationary or deflationary forces in evidence from time to time, but on the eve of the
Second Plan, the situation appears to be more or less one of balance, with slight pressures
which, if not kept under observation and cheek, might in the context of the greatly
increased rates of further expenditure contemplated hereafter become inflationary.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1955-56
33. I shall now deal with the revised estimates for the current year and the
budget estimates for the coming year.
34. The House will remember that the Budget for the current year placed the
revenue at Rs. 481.58 crores and expenditure at Rs. 498.93 crores, leaving a deficit
on revenue account of Rs. 17.35 crores. On the basis of the latest available information,
I now expect that the year will close with a surplus of Rs. 12.31 crores. This
improvement is due to a rise in revenue of Rs. 20.09 crores and a shortfall in expenditure
of Rs. 9.57 crores.
35. The revenue from Customs is now taken at Rs. 165 crores which is almost
the same as the budget figure of Rs.164.5 crores. During the year a number of export
duties were abolished or reduced in the interest of our export trade. Thus the duties on
jute manufactures, black pepper, coffee, and iron and steel manufactures were abolished
while the duties on oils and oil cakes, raw cotton etc., were reduced. The average rate of
the export duty on tea was also less than the rate of As. 10 per pound assumed in the
budget. The net result has been a reduction of Rs.11 crores in the revenue from export
duties. This reduction however has been offset by an equal Improvement in the import
duties on various items, such as motor spirit, machinery and iron and steel. Union Excise
duties are now estimated to yield Rs. 140 crores against Rs. 132.27 crores taken in the
budget. Of the improvement of about Rs. 8 crores, petrol and kerosene oil account for
Rs. 1 crore, cloth Rs. 2 crores, sugar Rs. 1.75 crores, and the new excise duties introduced
in the last budget Rs. 2 crores. For revenue from income Tax, the budget figure of Rs.
173.7 crores has been repeated. The Estate Duty collections are now estimated at Rs. 2
crores only against the budget estimate of Rs. 3 crores, but this revenue accrues almost
entirely to the States and the reduction does not affect the Central Budget. The revenue
10

from Posts & Telegraphs is expected to increase from the budget estimate of Rs. 70
lakhs to Rs. 2.27 crores as a result of better traffic; the share of States in income Tax is
now placed at Rs. 55.16 crores against the budget figure of Rs. 56.97 crores; there is a
formal increase of Rs. 11.2 crores on account of sale proceeds of evacuee property
which is offset by a corresponding transfer to the compensation pool on the expenditure
side; and other heads show a fall of Rs. 2.64 crores representing largely a throwforward
to the next year of a part of the profits from the sale of sugar imported on Government
account.
36. The expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs.489.36 crores of which
Civil expenditure will amount of Rs. 304.29 crores and expenditure on Defence Services
to Rs. 185.07 crores.
37. In Civil expenditure there is a saving of Rs.3.16 crores, excluding the selfbalancing item of Rs. 11.2 crores which I have mentioned earlier. This is the net result
of a number of variations, of which I need mention only the major ones. Assistance to
States towards relief and repair of damage caused by natural calamities is expected to
increase by Rs. 4 crores to Rs. 7 crores as a result of serious floods in certain parts of
the country. The expenditure on displaced persons has increased by about Rs. 3 crores
over the budget figure of Rs. 10.37 crores. On the other hand, expenditure under
Education shows a shortfall of Rs. 3 crores due to slower progress of schemes, particularly
the Centrally assisted State schemes, and there are similar savings of Rs.1 crore each in
grants to the Central Social Welfare Board and for village and small scale industries.
Interest charges are expected to be less by Rs. 1.4 crores and there is a similar decrease
under Civil Works.
38. Under Defence Services the revised estimates show a net decrease of
Rs. 17.61 crores. This is mainly because expenditure on stores was less than was
anticipated owing to difficulties in procuring supplies.
FINANCIAL YEAR 1956-57
39. For the coming year, I estimate the revenue, on the basis of existing taxation,
at Rs. 493.6 crores and the expenditure at Rs. 545.43 crores leaving a deficit of Rs.
51.83 crores on revenue account.
40. The revenue from Customs next year has been placed at Rs. 150 crores
against the current year’s revised estimates of Rs. 165 crores. The drop of Rs. 15 crores
is due, firstly, to the full year’s effect of the abolition of export duties made this Year;
secondly, to the cessation of Imports of sugar and, thirdly, to a similar reduction in the
imports of motor spirit as a result of increase in indigenous production. The yield from
Union Excise duties is taken at Rs. 145.45 crores as compared with the current year’s
revised estimates of Rs. 140.00 crores, the increase being largely due to an improvement
of Rs. 4 crores in motor spirit and of Rs. 1.2 crores in tobacco. Under Income Tax, the
revenue next year is placed at Rs. 180 crores, an increase of Rs. 6.3 crores over the
current year’s revised estimates. The revenue from Posts and Telegraphs is estimated at
11

Rs. 65 lakhs only against Rs. 2.27 crores this year. The dividend payable by Railways
next year is estimated at Rs. 39.66 crores, an increase of Rs. 3.5 crores over the
current year’s revised estimate. Of this amount Rs. 33.09 crores will represent the
interest element taken in reduction of the interest payments on the expenditure side
and the balance as contribution to revenue. The estimate of Estate Duty collections
next year is Rs. 2.5 crores, most of which will accrue to the States. Sale proceeds of
evacuee property will drop by Rs. 6.2 crores, but this, as explained earlier, will have
no net effect on the revenue budget. The only other item which needs mention is the
share of income Tax payable to States which will amount to Rs. 53.35 crores as
compared with Rs. 55.16 crores, the reduction being due to adjustments of overpayments made in the previous year.
41. I am budgeting for a total expenditure of Rs. 545.43 crores during the next
year of which Rs.203.97 crores will be on Defence Services and Rs.341.46 crores under
Civil heads.
42. The estimates of Defence Services show an increase of Rs. 18.90 crores
over the revised estimates of the current year. The increase is mainly due to the normal
expansion of the Navy and Air Force. The Army budget also shows an increase, due to
the carry-over to the next year of demands of stores which have not materialised during
the current year. Some increase is also expected in the manufacture in India of stores
required for the Services.
43. Civil expenditure next year shows an increase of Rs.43.37 crores, exclusive
of the self balancing item in respect of evacuee property mentioned earlier. The bulk of
the increase is on account of the rising tempo of development expenditure. I need not
weary the House by giving a detailed account of all the individual variations. As usual,
full particulars are given in the Explanatory Memorandum and I shall mention here
only the more important items.
44. The total expenditure on nation-building and development services under
Civil Administration, excluding Rs.3.6 crores transferred from other heads, amounts to
about Rs.92 crores as compared with Rs.69 crores during the current year. Provision for
Education increases by Rs.6.4 crores to Rs.21.6 crores which includes Rs.10.4 crores
for grants to States for basic, social and secondary education, Rs.3.5 crores for University
Grants Commission, and Rs.1.5 crores for scholarships to students of scheduled castes,
scheduled tribes and other backward classes. For expenditure on Medical and Public
Health an additional sum of Rs.4 crores has been provided; Agricultural and allied
services will cost Rs.4 crores more, and, similarly, development of village and small
scale industries Rs.1.3 crores more. Provision for scientific research has been increased
by Rs.2 crores and for coal and mineral prospecting by about Rs.1 crore. For development
of Khadi and handloom industries a total provision of Rs.6.1 crores has been made; in
the revenue budget but this will be met from the fund created out of the special cess on
mill-made cloth.
12

45. In addition to the increase of Rs.23 crores I have just mentioned, the
provision for Community Development and National Extension Service has been raised
by Rs.1.4 crores to Rs.12.9 crores; and that for the welfare of scheduled tribes, scheduled
castes and backward classes by Rs.3.4 crores to Rs.10.2 crores. The grant to the Central
Social Welfare Board and expenditure on Social and Moral Hygiene will cost Rs.1.6
crores more. Other increases are Rs.50 lakhs for grants to States for Primary Education
under the Finance Commission’s Award and Rs.1.8 crores for expenditure on Forest
Development.
46. Of the rest of the increase in Civil expenditure, a sum of Rs.2.7 crores
represents additional expenditure on displaced persons due largely to the continued
influx from East Bengal, and Rs.1.4 crores on Elections, the balance being the net
result of variations under other items.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
47. The current year’s budget provided for a capital expenditure of Rs.223.3
crores. This was inclusive of Rs.29 crores for State Trading schemes, mostly in regard
to foodgrains. These schemes are now estimated to yield a net credit of Rs.11 crores
owing largely to reduced imports of wheat and sugar. Capital outlay in respect of Railways
is now expected to be Rs.72 crores against the budget figure of Rs.66 crores, but this
increase has been more than offset by a shortfall in expenditure under a number of other
heads. Thus cash compensation to displaced persons shows a saving of Rs.6 crores in
the budget provision of Rs.15 crores. The revised estimates of capital outlay for the
current year now stand at Rs.170 crores.
48. For the next year, capital expenditure is estimated at Rs.316.7 crores
including Rs.9.5 crores for Government Trading schemes, mostly for our normal
purchases for the Central Reserve of foodgrains.
49. Provision for the capital outlay of Railways amounts to Rs.113 crores against
Rs.72 crores in the current year. Provision for the three steel plants at Rourkela, Bhilai
and Durgapur amounts to Rs.44 crores. A provision of Rs.5 crores has been made for
investment in the Life insurance Corporation which is being set up following the decision
to nationalise life insurance. Cash compensation to displaced persons is estimated at
Rs.20 crores. There is also an increase of Rs.6 crores on the capital outlay on Defence
next year.
50. In addition to the provision for capital outlay, the estimates include, against
the original Budget provision of Rs.355 crores for the current year, a revised figure of
Rs.327 crores this year for loans to State Governments and others, mostly for the
execution of projects in the Plan. The provision made for the next year on this account
is Rs.386 crores. Honourable Members will find the broad details of these loans in the
Explanatory Memorandum.
13

51. With the large and growing outlay in the context of the Plan, both on revenue
and on capital account, the question of securing the maximum possible economy and
avoiding wastage owing to delays and, inefficiency assumes added importance.
Honourable Members have naturally been taking keen interest in this question and the
Taxation Enquiry Commission had also stressed the need for a thorough and careful
enquiry, both in the Central Government and in the States, into the whole question of
public expenditure. As I have explained on various occasions we are keeping a continuous
watch over the growth of expenditure and securing economy, wherever possible, as part
of our day to day control over expenditure. We have an Economy Unit set up under the
Home and Finance Ministries continuously re-assessing the staff requirements of various
Central Ministries and an Organisation and Methods Division in the Cabinet Secretariat
engaged on a continuous review of organisation and methods of work in the various
Central Offices, so that wastes resulting from uneconomic methods are avoided. We
have also the assistance of the Estimates Committee in the pursuit of economy. Any net
reduction in the administrative expenditure in the Centre or in the States can hardly be
expected during the course of implementation of the Second Five Year Plan. Nevertheless,
this very tempo of rising expenditure during the next five years would open up many
possibilities of extravagance and waste and it is necessary to keep a still closer watch
over such expenditure to ensure that the tax-payer gets the maximum benefit out of the
planned outlay. We have been in consultation with the Planning Commission and have
come to the conclusion that the best way of dealing with this matter would be to set up
a special high-powered committee of Ministers and the Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission at the Centre to organize a thorough investigation, including inspection in
the field of the Important projects in hand both at the Centre and in the States (with the
approval of the National Development Council), through specially selected teams. These
teams will be composed of officials as well as non-officials specially selected for each
group of related investigations and may be assisted by outside experts. As the results of
each investigation are received, the High-powered Committee at the Centre win examine
them with a view to formulating proposals for effecting economy to be implemented by
Central Ministries or in the States, as the case may be. The orders of the Cabinet or
guidance from the National Development Council will be obtained wherever this is
considered necessary. Such proposals may conceivably include the setting up of economy
units for different categories of projects, preferably in the Planning Commission.
52. This brings me to the somewhat related question of the resources of the
States for financing the Plan. It is of great importance that the revenue budgets of the
States, as, indeed of the Centre, should be balanced. While it is reasonable to borrow
for investment outlay and for a time even some measure of deficit financing may be
necessary for financing such outlay, ordinary prudence demands that current expenditure
should be met by taxation. Capital expenditure has also to be phased so that it corresponds
to the results of special efforts to increase resources for development. The States have
been advised to bear these considerations in mind in framing their budget estimates for
14

1956-57. Some measure of relief to the revenue budget of most of the States may result
from a re-classification of expenditure between revenue and capital. This question was
examined carefully by us in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General
and, with a view both to uniformity and also because of the large and abnormal
expenditure necessitated by the Plan, we have suggested to the States that certain items
of expenditure might appropriately be transferred from revenue to capital, as for example,
expenditure on permanent assets of a concrete nature costing Rs.20,000 and over. The
Centre has also been able to make grants to the States over and above the transfer of
resources, which it had to make as a result of the last Finance Commissions’s Award,
but the Centre’s ability to make such grants is conditioned by its own revenue position.
In any case, the allocation of revenue resources between the Centre and the States is a
matter for the Finance Commission for which the Constitution specifically provides.
For the year 1956-57, Central assistance towards the schemes falling on the revenue
budgets of the States is being continued on the current pattern, although part of this
assistance will necessarily have to be reallocated among the re-organised units which
will come into existence later in the year as a result of the decisions on the
recommendations of the States Re-organisation Commission. The year 1956-57 will be
the last of the quinquennium covered by the Award of the first Finance Commission.
How far the Centre can continue or increase the present scale of assistance to the States
will depend on the Award of the next Finance Commission. The President has approved
the appointment of Shri K.Santhanam as the chairman of the next Finance Commission.
Other members of the Commission will be appointed shortly and the Commission is
expected to start its work in the near future. The Commission will have to consider the
finances of the re-organised States and its recommendations would normally take effect
from the year 1957-58. In addition to its normal duty to make recommendations about
the distribution of Central taxes and of Central grants, it is proposed to seek its advice
on a few other important subjects. The first of these, as was indicated in the last Budget
Speech, is the distribution of proceeds of Estate Duty in respect of which we are, at
present, tentatively following the last Finance Commission’s formula about incometax. Another subject is the terms which can appropriately be fixed for different kinds of
loans to the States. A large number of loans are being and will continue to be sanctioned
to the States for financing their Plan. The terms of each loan have so far been fixed ad
hoc and it is possible that, in some cases, they have proved onerous. An independent
body which will go into the question of the finances of State Governments would be
able to make a proper assessment of the burden of these loans on the States and also to
advise upon their appropriateness. Whatever relief these adjustments and the Finance
Commission may bring to them, It is clear that the States have to raise additional revenue
to cover the growing recurrent liabilities which the present and the next Plans will
involve on their revenue budgets. In this they may have to go beyond the lines
recommended by the Taxation Enquiry Commission which was visualising a much
smaller Second Five Year Plan.
15

WAYS AND MEANS
53. The current year’s budget provided for an overall deficit of Rs.327 crores
to be met by expansion of treasury bills. On the basis of the revised estimates, the
overall deficit is now expected at Rs.222 crores. As the opening balance of the year was
about’Rs.18 crores less than the minimum of Rs.50 crores the expansion of treasury
bills will amount to about Rs.240 crores.
54. Unlike the previous year when a combined loan was floated to cover the
requirements of both the Central Government and the State Governments, this year the
normal procedure of separate loans by the Centre and the States was followed. The
Central Government floated a 10-year loan, the 31% National Plan Bonds-Second Series.
This loan which was for Rs.100 crores was fully subscribed, the amount accepted being
Rs.103.7 crores. Small Savings have shown substantial improvement, the collections
now expected being Rs.65 crores against Rs.52 crores in the budget. While the response
so far has been encouraging, the task set for the next Plan is much bigger. As Honourable
Members will have seen from the Draft Outline of the Plan, Small Savings are expected
to yield Rs.500 crores during the next Plan, which is more than double the target for the
current Plan. Government have been taking various steps to intensify the Small Savings
movement. In the rural areas, the agency of Panchayats, Union Board Presidents and
Village Teachers is being utilised. The Women’s Savings campaign under the Central
Advisory Committee has been maintaining Ate progress and over 150 voluntary social
and women’s organisations have been appointed as agents for the sale of Certificates.
The State Governments are co-operating in the movement and some of them have created
special offices to intensify the small savings drives in co-operation and co-ordination
with the National Savings Organisation. Advisory Committees are being formed, both
at the State and the district level, to assist the movement and a system of Savings Groups
is proposed to be introduced in all offices and organisations. The higher target for the
next Plan can only be achieved, however, if there is full and whole-hearted co-operation
on the part of every citizen of the country. This is a task of vital national interest about
which there can be no two opinions and I hope that the fullest co-operation will be
forthcoming freely from all. I, therefore, renew once again my appeal for greater effort
on the part of every one to save and invest in Small Savings and thus contribute towards
the successful implementation of the Plan.
55. The improvement in the Ways and Means position this year is due largely
to the surplus in the revenue account and the savings in the capital expenditure and
loans to State Governments and others which I have mentioned earlier. Foreign aid this
year is now expected to amount to about Rs.56 crores against Rs.74 crores in the budget,
but this has been more than offset by improvement in other heads. Two loans which fell
due for repayment this year were duly repaid, the amount involved being Rs.69 crores.
56. The overall deficit next year is estimated at about Rs.390 crores. This follows
the larger provision for development expenditure in the revenue and capital budgets.
Credit has been taken for a new loan of Rs.100 crores next year. Small Savings next
16

year may amount to Rs.70 crores and foreign aid Rs.85 crores. There is no loan maturity
next year. Allowing for other miscellaneous transactions under Debt and Remittance
heads, it will be necessary, on these estimates, to expand treasury bills by Rs.390 crores
to cover the overall deficit.
57. I might summarise the Ways and Means position for the coming year.
Government need Rs.52 crores for meeting the revenue deficit and Rs.703 crores for
financing the capital outlay and loan requirements of State Governments and others.
Against this, they hope to raise Rat 100 crores from the market loan and Rs.70 crores
from small savings. Foreign aid expected next year amounts to Rs.85 crores and other
miscellaneous Debt and Remittance transactions may bring in Rs.110 crores. This will
leave a gap of about Rs.390 crores in the available resources to balance the budget.
58.

I now turn to the budget proposals for the coming year.

59. The position for the coming year is briefly that the deficit on revenue account
is estimated at Rs.51.83 crores and the overall deficit at Rs.390 crores. The immediate
question is how much of this deficit should be covered by additional taxation.
60. I referred earlier to the question of re-classification of expenditure between
revenue and capital. At the Centre, Honourable Members will recall, we are already
taking to capital temporarily a number of grants to States and there is not much scope
for further transfers from revenue to capital without straining unduly the rules of
classification. I believe also that, with the administrative machinery both at the Centre
and in the States getting increasingly geared to the execution of the Plan, shortfalls in
expenditure of the order which have occurred in recent years will tend to diminish. The
estimates for the coming year have been framed with as much care as possible; in
particular, substantial reductions have been made under heads which have shown
persistent savings and the provision for grants to States for various development schemes
has been based on a proper assessment of the ability of the States to find their share of
the resources required to finance those schemes. Although, therefore, it is not possible
to say categorically that the shortfalls will he entirely eliminated, or that there will be
no variations in estimates of revenue the margin of fluctuations is likely to be narrower
than in the past. Indeed, it may be said that the cuts that have been made in some of the
demands for next year may prove to be too fine. I cannot but stress again the principle
that current expenditure should, as far as possible, be met from current taxation. It is,
therefore necessary to cover the gap on revenue account in the coming year, If not
wholly, at least substantially. My proposals for additional taxation are related to this
objective.
CHANCES IN CUMSTOMS DUTIES
61. I shall first deal with the changes I propose to make in Customs Duties.
62. In regard to Import duties, a number of minor changes are being made and
I need only mention a few of them. The duty on liquid gold for glass making is being
17

raised from its present level of 311/4 per cent to 621/2 per cent. The duty on flash-lights
and flash light cases is being raised from 39-3/8 percent to 51 percent. These changes
will help the indigenous industries in these goods. Certain changes are also being made
in the items in the Import Tariff affecting mineral oils, mainly with a view to rationalising
the existing headings. The existing item in the Import Tariff relating to spectacle frames
and parts thereof is being amended so as to include complete spectacles within that
item. The net effect of the changes proposed will be an addition to revenue of about
Rs.1 crore.
As regards export duties, the only change I propose to make is by way of affording
relief to the Tea Industry. The House will recall that a slab system of export duty on tea
was introduced last year. It is too early to say how that system has worked. In the
meantime, however, our exports of tea have suffered a setback during 1955 as a result
of a number of factors, including a comparatively high production and keen foreign
competition. In order to afford some relief to the industry and to step up our exports of
medium teas, I propose that the existing duty for the slab relating to the price range of
Rs.3-4-0 to Rs.4/- per lb. be reduced by two annas per lb., that is, from eight annas per
lb., which is the present rate, to six annas per lb. The effect of this will be that all teas
ranging in price from Rs.2/8/- to Rs.4/- per lb. will bear a uniform duty of six annas per
lb. The change is being given effect to by a notification which is being issued immediately.
On the basis of the present scale of exports, the loss of revenue involved is expected to
be about Rs.1 crore.
UNION EXCISE DUTIES
63. Turning to Excise, I shall first deal with changes in the existing duties. My
main proposal is to raise the duties on all categories of Cotton Fabrics by 6 pies per sq.
yd., except on Dhoties and Sarees of the coarse category the duty on which would
remain unchanged. The Taxation Enquiry Commission had recommended enhancement
of the excise duties on all varieties of Cotton Fabrics and I had accordingly proposed in
last year’s Finance Bill an increase in the duties on medium and coarse Cotton Fabrics
from 6 pies per sq. yd. to one anna per sq. yd. It was, however, then represented that
prices of agricultural commodities, had been falling for some time, and the purchasing
power of the rural population was low. The off take from the mills had also declined at
the time and the mills were carrying large unsold stocks. The proposals were accordingly
withdrawn. Conditions have since noticeably Improved. Although mill production of
Cotton Fabrics has reached a level higher than ever before, the off take from the Mills
has steadily risen. In the context of an expanding demand for cloth, this position is
likely to improve still further. The prices of agricultural commodities have also risen.
After the most careful weighing up of all relevant factors, I have come to the conclusion
that an increase in the Excise Duty on medium and coarse cotton cloth is fully justified.
The yield expected from the proposed increase is Rs.141/2 crores.
I also propose to make minor changes in the existing duties in respect of Soap,
Strawboard and Art Silk Fabrics.
18

The duty on Soap is at present confined to soap produced with the aid of power.
Since this duty was first Imposed year before last, surveys conducted have shown that
the non-power operated units are producing substantial quantities of soap. Some of the
larger units amongst these are offering appreciable competition to the smaller power
operated units. I have accordingly proposed new excise duties for non-power operated
units at somewhat lower rates than the existing rates for power operated units. In the
matter of exemptions to the small-scale units also, it is proposed to put the non-power
operated unit in a slightly better position that the power operated units.
Strawboard at present enjoys an exemption from excise duty. Enquiries have
shown that this exemption is hardly justified. Strawboard and cheap Millboard compete
with each other. A substantial proportion of Strawboard is actually produced by well
organised units which hardly need any special protection. I accordingly propose to tax
Strawboard at the same rate as that at present applicable to Millboard, namely, 6 pies
per lb. As a measure of relief to the small producer, I also propose to give, by executive
notification, an exemption for the first 500 tons of Strawboard and the cheaper varieties
of Millboard cleared by any manufacturer during the financial year.
In regard to Art Silk Fabrics, it has been found that the exemption given to units
employing not more than 24 looms has placed them in a position considerably more
favourable than the small units in the sister industries producing cotton or woollen
textiles. This has further enabled them to offer unfair competition to the taxed sector of
the industry. I haves therefore, proposed the abolition of this exemption in its present
form. It is being replaced by an executive notification, in a modified form, exempting
the production of the first 9 looms by any manufacturer.
The total revenue effect of these small changes is an increase, of Rs.50 lakhs.
64. For new excise duties, I propose only two items, namely, Vegetable Nonessential Oils, and all kinds of Diesel 011, Vapourising 011 and Furnace Oil.
Vegetable non-essential oils figure in the list of commodities recommended by
the Taxation Enquiry Commission for an excise duty and I propose a duty of half an
anna per pound on all such oils. This, duty will be levied only on factories operated by
power. Even, among these, it is proposed to grant exemption by notification for the first
125 tons per year cleared for home consumption from any factory. This will ensure that
all ghanies and other small units are exempted from the duty. The yield expected is
Rs.51 crores.
Production of diesel oil and other fuel oils at the new Refineries at Bombay is
soon expected to outstrip the internal requirements for such oils. The import duty on
these oils should, therefore, be replaced by an excise duty. The excise duties I propose
are 4 annas per gallon on High Speed Diesel Oil and Vapourising Oil used primarily in
driving heavy motor vehicles, and Rs.30 per ton and Rs.15 per ton, respectively, on
other Diesel Oils and Furnace Oils. These new duties are expected to yield Rs.41 crores.
19

Countervailing Customs Duties will be imposed wherever necessary.
The net additional revenue from the changes in Excise Duties will amount to Rs.
25 crores.
INCOME TAX
65. I now come to income Tax. The only change I propose in personal taxation
is a slight adjustment upwards of the super-tax payable on incomes above Rs. 70,000.
With this adjustment, the rate of tax on the highest slab of income, that is, above
Rs. 1,50,000 will be 91.9 per cent against the present figure of 88.6 per cent. The extra
revenue on this account will be about Rs. 1 crore.
In this connection, I may mention that the Taxation Enquiry Commission had
recommended that the tax on the highest slab of income should not be more than about
86 per cent. They had, however, recommended that, in addition to this rate of tax, there
should be a surcharge cum compulsory deposit at a graduated rate on incomes above
Rs.25,000 the maximum being 5.6 per cent as Surcharge, and the same amount as deposit.
Their scheme envisaged, however, that against the surcharge a long-term loan, say, for
45 years, might be given at a nominal rate of interest under certain conditions and that
the deposit should be repayable with interest after 45 years. The net additional amount
that the tax-payer would have to pay in any year is thus represented by only one of
these. Considered purely as a tax burden, the effect of the Commission’s recommendation,
is thus a tax of 86 plus 5.6 per cent, that is to say, about 92 per cent, on the highest slab
of income. This will also be the position under my proposals in respect of these incomes.
I propose also to introduce a tax on Registered Firms. The income Tax Act
recognises two kinds of Partnership Firms; those which are registered and those which
are not registered. In the case of the former, no tax is Imposed on the firm as such but its
profits are taxed in the hands of the partners according to their respective shares and at
rates applicable to them individually. In the case of the latter, that is, the unregistered
firms, the tax is Imposed on the firm as such at rates applicable to personal incomes.
The registered partnerships, therefore, enjoy an advantage over the unregistered
partnerships, and they do not also pay any Corporation Tax which is payable by
Companies. I think there is adequate justification for Imposing a small tax on the
registered firms as such. I propose that the rate of such tax should be nine pies per rupee
up to Rs.75,000 one anna up to Rs.1,50,000 and one anna six pies for incomes above
this figure. The partners of the firm will get abatement on their proportionate shares of
this tax for the purpose of income-tax, but not for super-tax. In order that small
partnerships may not be affected by this, I propose to exempt incomes upto Rs.40,000.
In other words registered firms whose income is Rs.40,000 or less will not be required
to pay this new tax. The extra revenue from this tax is expected to be Rs.1 crore.
66. The other field of direct taxation is the taxes on corporations. About half of
our direct taxes comes from this source and there has been no change in Company
taxation during the last five years. In view of the large development expenditure that
20

has taken place in the First Plan Period and the even larger expenditure contemplated in
the next Plan, I think there is adequate justification for putting a small extra burden on
Companies. I propose, therefore, to effect three changes. First, the rebate of one anna of
income-tax at present given to non-Section 23-A Companies in respect of undistributed
profits will be withdrawn. Second, while the rate of super-tax payable by Indian
companies will remain, unchanged, there will be levied, in addition, a super-tax at a
graduated rate on the dividends declared by them above a certain limit, namely, 6 per
cent. This rate I propose to be 2 annas in the rupee on the amount distributed in excess
of 6 per cent, but up to 10 per cent of the paid-up capital. On distributions above 10 per
cent of such capital, the extra super-tax will be 3 annas in the rupee. Third, there will be
a tax of two annas on bonus issues. I have taken due notice of the recommendation of
the Taxation Enquiry Commission that there should not be any tax, on bonus shares. I
consider, however, that there is adequate justification for imposing such a tax and, in
any case, such tax is an integral part of the scheme I have proposed.
Incidentally, I am also taking this opportunity of completing the process which
we started in 1953 of equating the tax payable by a foreign company operating through
a branch and that payable by another company operating through a subsidiary Indian
company which remits the whole of its profits as dividends to the foreign parent company.
The net effect is that the tax payable by a foreign company operating through a branch
will go up from 53 per cent to 62 per cent.
Another change I propose is an increase in the penal super-tax payable by a Section
23-A company which deals wholly or mainly in investments. I propose to raise it from
the present figure of four annas in the rupee to eight annas in the rupee on the amount of
undistributed profits. The rate applicable to other Section 23-A companies will remain
unchanged.
The net effect of all these changes in corporate taxation will be an increase in
revenue of about Rs.8 crores. I also hope that the scheme proposed will have some antiinflationary effect.
67. In addition to these, the Finance Bill Contains several other proposals some
of which give relief to the tax-payers and some others which are int6nded to plug
loopholes. In general, they are in Implementation of some of the recommendations of
the Taxation Enquiry Commission. I do not propose to weary the House with the details
of these amendments and for this convenience of the Members I have appended to the
Budget papers a Memorandum explaining in details the provisions of the Bill.
At this stage, I should like to refer to only one of these amendments. The House
will remember that, shortly after Section 5 (4) of the investigation Commission Act had
been declared invalid by the Supreme Court, we issued an Ordinance on the 17th July
1954 enacting a new Section 34(1A) in the income Tax Act to enable us to take over the
cases which had been started under the provision declared invalid. Under this Ordinance,
which was subsequently ratified into law by Parliament, we took powers to reopen all
cases of tax evasion during the war years of more than Rs.1 lakh. As the law stands, this
21

power can be exercised only up to the 31st March 1956. There have been, since then,
two other judgements of the Supreme Court, one in October 1954 declaring Section 5
(1) of the investigation Commission Act invalid from the 17th July 1954 and another in
December 1955 declaring that Section invalid from the 26th January 1950. This means
that the Department will now have to take over again a large number of cases previously
dealt with by the investigation Commission. We have carefully reviewed the position
arising out )f the judgments of the Supreme Court in consultation with our legal advisers.
As a result, it is now proposed to have a redraft of the existing provisions of the law
enabling the Department to reopen old cases. Substantially, the position remains
unchanged the only difference being that, while the existing law lays down a time limit
up to the 31st March 1956 for the exercise of the Department’s powers to reopen cases
of concealment beyond eight years, the proposed amendment fixes no time limit. This
is being done for three reasons; firstly, the latest judgment of the Supreme Court having
been given only in December, 1955, it is not possible for the Department to issue all
notices within the short period of three months left since then; secondly, the validity of
the new Section 34(1A) is itself being challenged in several High Courts and it is not
known when we shall get a final decision on this point; and finally, the Taxation Enquiry
Commission have recommended that, as in other countries, there should be no time
limit to the reopening of cases of fraudulent tax evasion. This is a desirable. reform
which has been long overdue. The power of reopening cases beyond eight years will
not be exercised unless the amount of total tax evasion exceeds Rs.1 lakh and then only
with the sanction of the Central Board of Revenue. This will ensure that the powers are
exercised after proper scrutiny and only in cases of substantial evasion. It is also proposed
to give the Department powers of search and seizure of accounts and documents which
the investigation Commission had and which; the Taxation Enquiry Commission have
recommended the Department should have. The experience of the last year and a half
has shown-that unless the Department is armed with these powers, it is not possible
effectively to investigate cases of tax evasion. I have no doubt that the House will give
its whole-hearted support to measures taken to prevent and detect large-scale tax evasion
and it may take my assurance that the new powers taken now will not be exercised
unless they are absolutely necessary.
68. The net effect of these changes in income-tax is an increase of Rs. 10 crores,
of which the States’ share will amount to Rs.1.8 crores.
CHANGES IN POSTAL RATES
69. The Postal and Telegraph branches of the Posts and Telegraphs Department
have been working at a loss for some years. The net loss during the three years ended
the 31st March 1955, was Rs.222 lakhs in the Postal Branch and Rs.65 lakhs in the
Telegraph, and the losses during the current year in respect of these two Branches are
estimated at Rs.49 lakhs and Rs.82 lakhs, respectively. The main reasons for the losses
are the opening of unremunerative post offices and telegraph offices as part of the
Department’s expansion schemes under the First Five Year Plan on the one hand and
the charging of uneconomic rates on the other. The rates charged at present are, in many
cases, well below the cost of the service. A review of the existing postal and telegraph
22

rates has, therefore, been carried out with reference to the cost of the service, and, as a
result of the review, it has been decided to increase the fee for registration on postal
articles and the rates for inland telegrams. The existing registration fee of As. 6 per
article will be raised to As. 8 and on inland telegrams the minimum charge will be
raised from As. 12 to As. 13 for “Ordinary” and from Rs.1/8/to Rs.1/10/- for “Express”.
These enhanced rates for telegrams are the same as those that were in force prior to the
1st April 1950. The additional revenue expected from these increases is Rs.95 lakhs.
NET EFFECT OF THE PROPOSALS
70. The net effect of the proposals may now be summarised. The changes in
Customs Duties will not have any net effect on revenue. The new and increased Excise
Duties will yield RS.25 crores. Changes in income tax will result in an additional revenue
of Rs.10 crores of which the States? share will amount to Rs.1.8 crores, and changes in
postal rates will yield Rs.95 lakhs. In the result, Central revenues will increase by
Rs.34.15 crores.
71. My taxation proposals will still leave a deficit of Rs.17.68 crores on revenue
account. This is a large amount, but unforeseen marginal Improvement in revenue and
savings in expenditure may yet be possible, and I propose to leave it uncovered. I must
repeat, however, that additional taxation is inseparable from a bolder plan of economic
development. The Taxation Enquiry Commission had in mind an order of expenditure
on the Plan amounting to Rs.3,500 crores. The size of the Plan is now larger and a
correspondingly larger tax effort is necessary. The findings of the Commission have
shown that in real terms, there has been little addition to the national tax effort relatively
to national income over the last two or three decades. Even to maintain the proportion
of tax revenues to national income more or less constant, additional taxation of the
order of Rs.350 crores over the five year period would be necessary at the Centre and in
the States. This proportion has, however, to be raised, moderately. What I have proposed
this year by way of tax effort is, in my judgment, the minimum that must be attempted
in view of the requirements of the Plan.
72. Including the additional taxation, the overall deficit for the year will stand
at Rs.356 crores. I think it is Important to bear in mind the limitation I mentioned earlier
in regard to deficit financing. There is not, at the moment, any great slack left in the
economy which would justify anything more than a reasonable amount of deficit
financing. Up to a point deficit financing is not only permissible, but even desirable in
a developing economy. Experts differ as to the permissible limit, but it would be quite
unrealistic to assume that deficit-financing of this order can be maintained for any
length of time, without inviting inflation. The road to inflation is easy enough, but it
opens flood-gates which it would later be impossible to close. We are, in fact, taking a
measure of risk with the deficit financing proposed for 1956-57 and we shall have to
watch its effects carefully and adjust subsequent programmes in the light of these effects.
73. The budget I place before you is, as I have said, the first step towards the
Implementation of the Second Five Year Plan. A big Plan requires a big effort, and to
make a good beginning with it will be, to vary the old adage, almost to ensure its
accomplishment. The objective we have set to ourselves is that primary and ineluctable
23

duty of every modern Government, namely to raise the living standards of the people
and to create in the process a progressive and equitable economic and social order. This
objective, moreover, is to be attained by democratic means. The sanction behind the
Plan is not the will of Government (¶ÉÉºÉxÉ ¶ÉÉÎBÉDiÉ) but the will of the people (VÉxÉ¶ÉÉÎBÉDiÉ)
Democracy is for us a means as well as an end. It defines our objective, and it indicates
the approaches and techniques to be adopted for the fulfilment of the objective.
The problem is not merely one of raising the statistical average of per capita
incomes which could easily be a will of the wisp; it is one of raising the lowest incomes
and of opening out to the younger generation avenues of growth and advancement that
will bring out the best in them. For this, the present generation has to make sacrifices. It
has to work harder and it has to abstain from asking for immediate returns. A plan
verily, is a Vajan. This is the essence Þ+ÉxÉäxÉ |ÉºÉÉÊ´É-ªÉv´ÉàÉä-É ´ÉÉä+ÉÉÎºi´É-]BÉE BÉEÉ àÉvÉÖBÉEÂÞ of the process
of capital formation, of building up the infrastructure of development and of equipping
the community with the tools and implements needed for increasing the national product.
We shall succeed in this task to the extent that we bring to bear 11 on it injudicious
proportions all the idealism and all the practical realism that we possess.
The Second Five Year Plan will be followed by several other Plans and it is only
after we have fulfilled, shall I say, the Third Five Year Plan that we shall see a marked
and unmistakable improvement in living standards all round and in the capacity of the
country to go ahead more rapidly on its own momentum. The burdens that the Plan
Imposes upon the people are by no means light nor can their weight be mitigated by any
assurance that they are temporary. On the other hand, our people stand, so to say, on the
threshold of a golden age; we have to build well and truly for them; and we have to
raise, ungrudgingly and unhesitatingly, all the moneys necessary therefor. Money is,
after all, mainly a measure of effort; and the success of our monetary calculations,
whether for our taxation measures, or for our deficit financing, or for anything else for
the matter of that, depends vitally upon the measure of productive effort put forth in the
community. It is the responsibility, If I may with all respect say so, of every member of
this honourable House and of similar chambers all the country over, to adjudge every
proposal on this basis, that is, not of what Government seek to take from this sector or
from that (indeed Government cannot take anything for itself) but of what that proposal
in terms of mobilising the real efforts of the country means and of whether by any
alternative proposal we could call forth equal effort without greater sacrifice.
The success that has attended on the first Plan makes it clear, I believe, that the
people of this country are capable of, and willing to put forth, the effort necessary to
achieve bigger things and to make for themselves and for their children an India befitting
of her great heritage. Our destiny is now in our hands. Our people have throughout
history been known for their almost infinite patience and perseverance. Given the
leadership, they have never failed to respond in more than adequate measure. It is these
people, sir, that have now girt their loins and stand ready to launch forth on their new,
and so far their greatest, endeavour. They can rightfully expect us, their chosen leaders
and representatives, to give them of our best counsels, loyal guidance and informed
direction.
(February 29, 1956)
24

