1

Budget

1999-2000

Speech

of

Shri Yashwant Sinha
Minister of Finance
27th February, 1999
PART A

Sir,
I rise to present the budget for the year 1999-2000.
I n t ro d u c t i o n
2.
For the first time after Independence with the enthusiastic support of all
political parties in Parliament, it has been possible for me to discard the long standing
tradition of British Raj of presenting the budget at 5 PM. A new beginning is being
made today as I present the last Budget of 1900’s. I assure you this is not the only
new feature. There are many more in this budget.
The Economic Context
3.
The decade of the nineties has witnessed extraordinary changes. It began
with the collapse of the centrally planned economies; it is ending with market
economies facing a serious crisis.
4.
The year 1998 particularly has been a year of unprecedented global turmoil.
The East Asian financial crisis took a heavy toll of important economies in the region
and spread to other countries. Japan continued in recession and in August 1998
severe crisis afflicted Russia. By January 1999, the contagion had spread to Brazil
triggering massive capital flight and a steep depreciation of the currency. World
output growth dropped below 2%, the growth of world trade decelerated sharply,
commodity prices fell steeply, currencies were savaged and capital flows to developing
countries declined sharply.
5.
In India, we had to contend with the additional challenge of economic
sanctions imposed on us after the Pokhran nuclear tests. While we have not remained
unaffected by these developments, we have reasons to be satisfied at the way we
have withstood the impact of these challenges. Despite the hostile economic
1

2

environment, our GDP growth in 1998-99 has accelerated to 5.8% compared to 5%
last year. Our farmers have led the way with 5.3% growth in agriculture and allied
sectors. Since the beginning of 1998-99, we have added $2 billion to our foreign
currency reserves as of February 23, 1999 and we have successfully curbed undue
volatility in the forex market. The current account deficit in the balance of payments
is estimated at a modest 1.4% of GDP compared to 1.6% in 1997-98. Although
inflation had risen sharply during the year, we have succeeded in bringing it down to
below 5% now. All this is described in detail in the Economic Survey presented to
Parliament a few days ago.
6.
However, there is no room for complacency. The challenges before us, both
international and domestic, remain grave. The fiscal and revenue deficits of both
Centre and States are still too high and are undermining our ability to bring down
interest rates, stimulate investment and growth, curb inflationary potential, generate
resources for priority, non-interest expenditure needs and raise exports.
7.
Above all, despite our continuing concern year after year, we have made
only a limited impact on the problems of poverty and unemployment. The various
schemes of the Government in this area lack focus and convergence. The delivery
systems need to be cost effective and community based. The fruits of economic
development should largely reach the poor and the vulnerable specially the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes who, in turn, need to be
empowered fully. Without this, I am afraid, our planning will be devoid of any direction.
8.

The broad strategy of this Budget therefore is six-fold:

*

Begin a medium-term process of revenue and fiscal deficit reduction, along
the lines indicated in the Ninth Plan, which will free more resources for
productive investment and growth and contain inflation.

*

Undertake a major reform of indirect taxes to promote productivity and
employment.

*

Deepen and widen economic reforms in all major sectors and accelerate
internal liberalization to release the productive energies and creativity of
our farmers, manufacturers, traders and service providers.

*

Safeguard the economy from external shocks, revive exports and stimulate
the domestic engines for growth revival.

*

Strengthen the knowledge-based industries and thus prepare ourselves
for the challenges of the new millennium.
Last but not the least

*

Revitalise and redirect public programmes for human development,
encompassing food security, health care, education, employment and
shelter. Their focus should be on empowering the poor and the weaker
sections, especially those belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes.

Agriculture and Rural Development
9.
This year ’s growth performance has once again underlined the critical
importance of agriculture in our economy. I propose a multi pronged programme to
further strengthen our rural economy.

3

10.
On water, which is the lifeblood of agriculture, I propose the following
initiatives:
*

*

*

It is important to unify the multiplicity of watershed development
programmes within the framework of a single national initiative - a National
Movement of Watershed Development that fosters implementation ability
at the local level and creates community infrastructure for micro watershed
projects through active involvement of Gram Panchayats, Local Self Help
Groups and NGOs. For this, a Watershed Development Fund will be
established with NABARD to cover 100 priority districts within 3 years.
The Central Government will provide necessary matching assistance to
NABARD. This will create income generating opportunities for the landless
and the poor; especially those belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes.
The Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme aims to expedite the
completion of ongoing irrigation projects by providing matching assistance
to States. However, the water rates in most States do not even cover full
Operations and Maintenance costs. To encourage better management and
maintenance of costly irrigation assets, the Centre will provide larger
financial assistance to States that rationalise their water rates to cover at
least O&M costs.
In order to promote farmer participation in water management, the Centre
will provide a one time management subsidy and recurring assistance over
an initial period of 3 years to all registered Water Users Associations, linked
to incremental water rate collection. This will supplement the States’ own
contribution.

11.
Water and credit must flow together for maximum impact. Last year, I had
announced a number of initiatives for improving the flow of credit from the banking
sector to agriculture. I am happy to report to this House that institutional credit flow
to agriculture has shown a 20% increase in the current year, taking the level to
about Rs.38,000 crore as compared to Rs.31,698 crore in the previous year. I propose
to take the following further measures for improving flow of agricultural and rural
credit:
*
The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) has emerged as an
important scheme for financing rural infrastructure projects of the State
Governments. Last year, I had announced an allocation of Rs.3,000 crore
from the banking sector under RIDF IV. I propose to continue the scheme.
The corpus of RIDF V will be raised to Rs.3,500 crore. The repayment period
is also being extended from five to seven years. The scope of RIDF will also
be widened to allow lending to Gram Panchayats, Self-Help Groups and
other eligible organisations for implementing village level infrastructure
projects.
*
In line with my announcement last year, the Kisan Credit Card Scheme
has been launched by all public sector banks. These Cards provide timely
credit to farmers in a flexible and cost effective manner. So far, six lakh
Kisan Credit Cards have been issued. I am asking public sector banks to

4

*

extend the coverage so that twenty lakh farmers can benefit from this scheme
in the coming year.
The reform measures initiated to strengthen and restructure the Regional
Rural Banks will continue. A provision of Rs.168 crore is being made for
recapitalisation of RRBs.

*

Micro enterprises have great potential for generating productive employment,
especially in rural areas. NABARD and SIDBI have launched schemes for
promotion of Self Help Groups and NGOs as a channel for flow of funds to
micro enterprises. Following last budget’s initiative, NABARD is likely to
cover about 15,000 Self Help Groups in 1998-99, as against the target of
10,000. I am asking NABARD and SIDBI to redouble their efforts in this
direction and ensure coverage of at least 50,000 Self Help Groups during
the course of the next year.

*

To augment the flow of credit for food and agro processing industries, lending
by banks to this sector will be treated as priority sector lending.

12.
Today, we have a very weak post-harvest storage and marketing
infrastructure. This causes tremendous national loss. To overcome this problem, I
propose to introduce a new credit-linked capital subsidy scheme for construction of
cold storages and godowns. This scheme, which will be implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture with the help of NABARD, will help create additional cold storage
capacity of 12 lakh tonnes and will rehabilitate and modernise 8 lakh tonnes of
existing units over the next few years. We also propose to create 4.5 lakh tonnes of
onion storage capacity. This House, especially the main opposition party, can readily
appreciate our special concern for onions.
13.
Fragmentation of agricultural land holdings undermines productive use of
land. Some States have lagged behind in attending to this important task of land
reforms. To accelerate reforms in this direction, the Central Government will provide
special financial assistance to States, which undertake this task.
14.
One of the problems with effective distribution and use of fertilizer is the
mismatch between its demand and availability at the on-set of the sowing operations.
In order to tackle this problem, I propose to experiment with an incentive discount
to farmers for lifting fertilizer from the cooperative societies during the lean months
of April and May.
15.
The on-going schemes for the development of degraded and wastelands
will be reoriented to permit local Self Help Groups and the landless poor, specially
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, to develop and
utilise such lands in each village. The whole programme will be based on participatory
management with the Gram Panchayat having a pivotal role. During 1999-2000, we
will earmark a total amount of Rs.50 crore to take up this scheme on an experimental
basis in those States that are prepared to put in a matching contribution.
National Programme for Rural Industrialisation (NPRI)
16.
Rural Industrialisation is important for creating employment opportunities,
raising rural incomes and strengthening agriculture-industry linkages. Thus far, it
has been pursued by a multiplicity of government agencies. However, the impact of

5

these programmes at the grass roots level has remained modest. We must integrate
the efforts of the various government agencies and ensure active community
participation. Accordingly, I propose a National Programme for Rural Industrialisation
(NPRI) with the mission to set up 100 rural clusters every year to give a boost to rural
industrialisation. This is being done for the benefit of rural artisans and unemployed
youth. In the long run, it will reduce rural urban disparities. The Small Industry
Development Organisation will coordinate this programme. The Khadi and Village
Industries Commission (KVIC) will play an important role in this. The marketing
infrastructure available with KVIC would be put to optimum use in this effort. It will
go a long way in the marketing of rural industrial products if KVIC could develop its
own brand name for the purpose. The proposed rural clusters will be spread
throughout the country, with a reasonable balance between high potential and
backward rural areas.
National Human Development Initiative (NHDI)
17.
Even a half-century after Independence, the levels of human development
in India lag behind most other countries. The essence of human development should
be to empower vulnerable groups in society to take advantage of the process of
development. Empowerment, in my view, entails access to five basic requirements,
namely, Food, Health Care, Education, Employment and Shelter. It is our resolve to
make them available to the entire population of this country within a decade. With
this initiative for people-centred development, we will be implementing the Prime
Minister’s mandate for ‘reforming the reforms’.
Food: The Targeted Public Distribution System has been designed to provide food
security, especially to those below the poverty line, on the basis of susbidised foodgrain
prices. With greater involvement of Gram Panchayats in its supervision and
implementation, the Targeted Public Distribution System will be suitably strengthened
to ensure its proper coverage and make it efficient.
The Targeted Public Distribution System does not however adequately cover the
indigent senior citizens who have no income of their own and none to take care of
them in the village. I propose to launch a new scheme, “Annapurna” in 1999-2000,
to provide food security to such persons. “Annapurna” will provide 10 kg. of foodgrains
per month free of cost to all indigent senior citizens who are eligible for old age
pension but are presently not receiving it and whose children are not residing in the
same village. The number of persons benefitting from the scheme will not for the
present exceed 20% of the old age pensioners within that State. The Gram Panchayat
will be required to identify, prepare and display a list of such persons after giving
wide publicity.
Health Care: The expansion and improvement of health infrastructure and services
are key goals set out in the Special Action Plan announced by the Prime Minister.
While an extensive network for primary health care has been created in most rural
areas, inadequate community participation and supervision has constrained use of
these facilities to much below their capacity. Our goal is to integrate and synergise
the existing programmes for health care, family welfare, rural development and related
areas in different Central Ministries and to deploy the available resources so that
every household secures ready access to both primary health care and family welfare

6

services. The Central Government will provide funds to such Gram Panchayats that
come forward with their own contribution to set up primary health care facilities in
their respective areas. This will match similar assistance from the concerned State
Government.
Education: Access to primary education is critical for empowering people. Several
States have recorded considerable success with their respective models of education
guarantee schemes. I propose to implement an Education Guarantee Scheme at the
national level. The aim will be to provide an elementary school in every habitation,
which does not have one within a radius of 1 km. Initially, the local community
would provide the premises and select a local person as a part time teacher. Teaching
material and other assistance will be provided by the Central and the State
Governments, while Gram Panchayats will mobilise contribution from the local
community in cash and kind for running the school for at least two years. After the
school has functioned successfully for two years, it will be upgraded on a permanent
basis. At least 1.8 lakh such schools will become operational during the next three
years of the Ninth Plan. The resources available under the existing Centrally sponsored
education schemes will be mobilised to support this important initiative. This initiative
will provide an opportunity to the rural poor, especially those belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes to secure education
for their children. This is the first and most important step towards their
empowerment.
Employment: At present, a variety of self-employment and wage employment
schemes are in operation. To enhance the effectiveness of these schemes in generating
income-earning opportunities for the rural poor, Government will follow a fourpronged strategy with the common theme of ensuring greater involvement of
Panchayati Raj institutions:
*

The existing scheme of Jawahar Rozgar Yojana will be modified to ensure
that all funds are placed at the disposal of Gram Panchayats for creation of
rural infrastructure. They will have the sole authority for preparation of
annual action plans and their implementation, including the power to
execute works with the approval of the Gram Sabha. The modified scheme
will be called “Gram Samridhi Yojana”.

*

The wage employment programme of Employment Assurance Scheme will
be implemented at the district/block levels, with the selection of works
being decided by the Zila Parishads in consultation with the other elected
representatives. The Employment Assurance Scheme presently operates
through out the country. We will give special priority to areas suffering
from endemic labour exodus.

*

The Gram Panchayat will maintain a live employment register available to
the Gram Sabha and public for scrutiny. To ensure that the funds under
the wage employment schemes are spent with the active involvement of the
elected Panchayati Raj institutions, it is proposed that while 80% of funds
would be released to implementing agencies as per normal procedure, the
remaining 20% will be released as an incentive only if the State has put in
place elected and empowered Panchayati Raj institutions.

7

*

The plethora of self-employment programmes for the rural poor will be
merged into a single programme called “Swaran Jayanti Gram Swa-Rozgar
Yojana”, which will have greater participation of the Gram Panchayats.
This will enable the implementing agencies to have greater flexibility in
execution to meet the needs of the local people.

These schemes will largely benefit the poor and the unemployed youth in the
rural areas, especially those belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes.
Shelter: The rural housing shortage at the beginning of 1997-98 was estimated at
nearly 140 lakh units, which included shelterless households and those with only
kutcha dwellings. Government’s priority will be to provide shelter to all shelterless
poor households by the end of the Ninth Plan. The task of upgradation of kutcha
dwellings of poor households will be completed by the end of the Tenth Plan.
Furthermore, to ensure integrated provision of shelter, sanitation and drinking water,
we propose to launch a comprehensive “Samagra Awas Yojana”, which will embrace
existing programmes including Indira Awas Yojana.
18.
The National Human Development Initiative will go a long way in empowering
the weakest sections of the population and improving the quality of rural life. This
will minimise the rural-urban disparities. The effectiveness of this initiative will depend
critically on the extent to which the Gram Panchayat, as an elected body, can assume
a pivotal role in implementing the various components of the programmes. I propose
to declare 1999-2000 as the “Year of the Gram Sabha” to affirm our resolve to set the
process of decentralised democracy in motion, with human development as the core
objective of planning.
Housing
19.
Turning to shelter in urban areas, we have already taken major steps for
encouraging housing development, including repeal of the Urban Land (Ceiling and
Regulation) Act. To improve the flow of credit for housing I propose the following
measures:
*

To develop the primary and secondary market for housing mortgages, it is
necessary to simplify the present legal provisions for foreclosure and transfer
of property. I propose to make necessary changes in the foreclosure laws in
the housing sector through amendments in the National Housing Bank
Act.

*

To strengthen housing finance companies, I will be proposing changes in
the tax treatment of the income earned on non-performing assets.

*

To enhance the availability of banking funds to the housing sector, RBI will
be advising scheduled commercial banks to lend up to 3% of their
incremental deposits for housing finance.

*

National Housing Bank is implementing the Golden Jubilee Rural Housing
Finance Scheme for which I announced a target of 1 lakh dwelling units
last year. Encouraged by the satisfactory response to this scheme, I propose
to increase this target by 25% to 1.25 lakh dwelling units during 19992000.

8

*

The National Housing Bank has proposed a scheme, which entails a
reduction in the interest rates for small borrowers. The scheme will be
available in towns where Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act is not
applicable. We will provide necessary support to NHB for this purpose. The
details of the scheme would be announced by NHB.

20.
The development of housing in urban areas also depends heavily on the
quality of urban services. Many of our municipal bodies are at present financially
too weak to provide basic services. To encourage these bodies to improve their
creditworthiness in financial markets, I propose to accord tax-free status to a limited
amount of municipal bonds issued each year. A little later, I shall be announcing far
reaching tax initiatives to promote housing.
Industry and Infrastructure
21.
I am deeply conscious that the last two years have been difficult for Indian
industry in the context of growing integration with the world economy and the
inevitable uncertainties of the global market place. But we should also be proud of
the way Indian industry has surmounted difficult challenges and produced worldclass winners in a number of fields such as information technology and
pharmaceuticals. The process of corporate and industrial restructuring in the face
of new challenges is inevitable. To help this transition, I shall be announcing important
tax initiatives to facilitate corporate mergers and amalgamations.
22.
The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act will be reviewed and
amended so that the primary focus is shifted to development of industry rather than
its regulation.
23.
The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act has become obsolete in
certain areas in the light of international economic developments relating to
competition laws. We need to shift our focus from curbing monopolies to promoting
competition. Government has decided to appoint a Committee to examine this range
of issues and propose a modern Competition Law suitable for our conditions.
24.
The Prime Minister ’s Advisory Council on Trade and Industry has made
important
recommendations
regarding
knowledge-based
industries.
The
pharmaceutical industry is one of the important knowledge-based industries where
we have comparative advantage. We must strengthen our drug industry’s research
and development capabilities. Government has decided to set up two High Level
Committees to review the present drug policy so as to reduce the rigours of price
controls where they have become counter-productive and also to identify required
support to Indian pharmaceutical companies to undertake domestic R&D. My
colleague, the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers will be making a separate
announcement regarding this initiative. Further, in order to promote foreign direct
investment in this sector, Government has decided to permit up to 74% equity
under the automatic route.
25.
While we devote our attention to the new sunrise industries, we have not
neglected established industries like textiles, which employs 380 lakh workers and
accounts for about 20% of our manufacturing valued added. The Technology
Upgradation Fund Scheme has been approved by the Government and will become

9

operational from April 1999. For the next five years it will provide a substantial
interest incentive of 5% on loans availed by textile units from financial institutions
and banks. It will cover weaving, knitting, processing and finishing units, garment
manufacturing, cotton ginning and processing and the jute industry. The scheme is
being extended to include the spinning industry also.
26.
In the National Agenda for Governance, my Government has already
proclaimed our commitment to the Handloom sector for providing services, technical
and marketing facilities for handloom weavers. In the area of marketing, I propose to
introduce a new integrated handloom promotion scheme, Deen Dayal Hathkargha
Protshahan Yojana which would encourage processing facilities, new design inputs
to weavers and opening new avenues for marketing of handloom fabrics.
27.
Government has already undertaken important legislative and other reform
initiatives in key infrastructure sectors such as power, telecom, roads and ports.
28.
The Sethusamudram Ship Canal Project will provide a shorter sea route
between the Eastern and the Western ports of our country. I propose to provide
funds during 1999-2000 to examine the techno-economic feasibility of this much
awaited project.
Small Scale Industry
29.
Last year, I had announced a number of initiatives to improve the availability
of credit to the SSI Sector. Credit delivery to this sector continues to pose challenges
to our banking sector. I propose the following initiatives to improve the delivery
system for credit to SSI units:
*

The composite loan scheme of SIDBI and commercial banks is designed to
ease operational difficulties of the small borrowers by providing term loan
and working capital through a single window. The limit for composite loans
is currently Rs.2 lakh. I propose to increase this limit to Rs.5 lakh.

*

To simplify the computation of working capital limits of SSI units, last year
I had announced that for SSI units having an aggregate turn over of Rs.4
crore, working capital limit would be fixed at 20% of the annual turnover. I
propose to increase this limit to Rs.5 crore.

*

In line with the recommendations of a high powered committee appointed
by it, RBI had advised banks to delegate more powers to branch managers
to grant ad hoc limits, to simplify application forms, to fix their own norms
for assessment of credit requirement and open more SSI branches. These
measures should ease the flow of bank credit to SSI units.

*

To increase the outreach of banks to the tiny sector, lending by banks to
non banking finance companies or other financial intermediaries for
purposes of on-lending to the tiny sector is being included within the
definition of priority sector for bank lending.

*

Inability to provide adequate security to banks and low recovery are often
cited as a major constraint in flow of investment credit to SSI units. The
problem is more acute for export oriented and tiny sector enterprises. To
alleviate this problem, a new credit insurance scheme will be launched.

10

Science and Technology
30.
“Jai Vigyan” is the tribute so aptly paid by our Prime Minister to hail the
achievements of our scientists. The time has come to unleash the creative potential
of our scientists and innovators at grass roots level. Only then we can make India
truly self-reliant and a leader in sustainable technologies. I propose a national
foundation for helping innovators all over the country. This Fund, with an initial
corpus of Rs.20 crore, will build a national register of innovations, mobilise intellectual
property protection, set up incubators for converting innovations into viable business
opportunities and help in dissemination across the country.
31.
Our research institutions have the capacity to evolve new vaccines that will
revolutionise the medical and health systems. We propose to set up a Technology
Mission on vaccines to provide a focus to the effort.
32.
Our country is endowed with diverse and precious genetic resources, which
need to be prudently conserved and managed. Among the 18 hot spots of bio-diversity
in the world, two happen to be in India, in the Eastern Himalayas and the Western
Ghats respectively. To coordinate policies, research, documentation and legal
protection of the country’s rights in this important area, a National Bio-resources
Board (NBB) will be set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Science and
Technology.
Banking
33.
Last year I had announced important decisions flowing from the
Narasimham Committee Report on Banking Sector Reforms. Subsequently, the
Reserve Bank of India has taken further follow up action. I propose to carry forward
the reform process:
*

The high level of NPAs in our public sector banks continues to remain a
cause of concern. The Debt Recovery Tribunals, which were set up for
expeditious adjudication and recovery of debts due to banks and financial
institutions, have started showing encouraging results. Government has
decided to set up 5 more DRTs and 4 more Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunals. I also propose to introduce a Bill in the current session of
Parliament to make certain amendments in the Recovery of Debts due to
Banks and Financial Institutions Act to strengthen its provisions.

*

A Working Group has recently been set up by us to devise appropriate
strategies for dealing with the problem of restructuring weak banks including
their NPAs.

*

The inability of banks to enter into timely compromise settlements of chronic
cases of overdue loans leads to locking up of banks’ funds and long drawn
litigation in recovery suits. Public sector banks will be encouraged to set
up Settlement Advisory Committees so that such chronic cases, specially
those relating to the small sector, are settled in a timely and speedy manner.
RBI will be issuing necessary guidelines to the banks in this regard.

*

Our banks are required to observe RBI norms for maintaining provisions
against doubtful and non-performing assets. These norms have been
strengthened in recent years. To assist banks to come up to international

11

standards of prudential norms I shall be announcing certain changes in
the tax deductibility of provisions made.
External Sector
34.
To strengthen our external payments situation, we need to revitalise our
exports and encourage more non-debt inflows in the form of foreign investment. The
following steps will be taken:
*

The existing scheme of export credit in foreign currency is being revamped
to make available pre-shipment and post-shipment credit at internationally
competitive rates and bring about major simplification of procedures. The
RBI will separately announce the details.

*

Studies show that our exporters are handicapped by high transaction costs
related to foreign trade licensing, tax procedures and the banking system.
I am establishing a high powered committee under the Revenue Secretary
to go into this problem and make concrete recommendations for reduction
in such transaction costs within three months.

*

In order to make inflows of foreign direct investment hassle free, the
Government has decided to expand the list of automatic approvals covering
important industrial and services sectors. The expanded list will be
announced separately by the Minister of Industry. Wherever FIPB clearance
is required, henceforth FIPB will give the decision within 30 days.

*

There have been complaints about slow implementation of foreign direct
investment (FDI) approvals. To ensure that such approvals are quickly
translated into actual investment inflows and projects, Government has
decided to create a Foreign Investment Implementation Authority (FIIA)
within the Ministry of Industry, which may also include representatives of
State Governments.

*

Households and various charitable and religious institutions hold a huge
amount of gold in the country. These are idle assets earning no income for
the holders, who often incur costs to ensure security. This is a somewhat
anomalous situation considering that the country spends thousands of
crore worth of foreign exchange each year to meet fresh demand for gold
holding. To mobilise this idle gold, I propose a new Gold Deposit Scheme.
Selected banks will be permitted to accept gold deposits and issue interest
bearing certificates or bonds which, on maturity, can be reclaimed in gold.
This would free depositors from the problems of storage, movement and
security for the gold in their possession, while providing them with a regular
source of income. For the country, by recycling idle gold, we should be able
to reduce our dependence on imported gold. To encourage this process, I
propose to exempt the interest on the gold deposit bonds/certificates from
Income Tax and the value of assets deposited in the gold deposit scheme
from Wealth Tax. Furthermore, any capital gains made on these gold bonds/
certificates through trading or at redemption will be exempt from capital
gains tax. I would also urge all State Governments to consider exempting
movement of gold covered under the scheme from octroi, sales tax, stamp
duty and similar levies. I must point out that the scheme will not enjoy

12

amnesty.
scheme.

The Reserve Bank will take necessary steps to implement the

*

In my last Budget, I had proposed a set of initiatives to strengthen the
participation of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) in the development of our
country. Encouraged by their response, I now propose a few more initiatives:

*

We shall extend the facility of automatic approval for investment up to
100% by NRIs/OCBs for all items, except those which attract notified FDI
equity caps, or compulsory licensing or public sector reservation under the
Industrial Policy or are reserved for the small scale sector.

*

Our major stock exchanges have screen-based automated trading in
securities. It is now technically possible for them to open trading terminals
abroad, which would facilitate the participation of NRIs in our capital
markets. I have asked the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
to work out the modalities for this purpose.

*

The existing RBI approval mechanism for NRI investment in Indian mutual
funds will be simplified to a post-facto reporting mechanism.

Capital Market
35.
A vibrant capital market is essential for providing the much-needed funds
for our infrastructure sector. Infrastructure projects need long term funds, which,
in turn, require a deep and well-functioning debt market. With a view to modernising
the debt market and introducing paperless trading in this segment also, Government
proposes to abolish stamp duty on transfer of debt instruments within the depository
mode.
36.
Lately, there has been considerable debate on the importance of good
governance of Indian corporates. It is increasingly being realised that if investors
have to be drawn back to the capital market, companies have to put their houses in
order by following internationally accepted practices of corporate governance. This
is necessary to enhance investor confidence. To help promote this trend, I propose
to institute a National Award for Excellence in Corporate Governance.
37.
The Deepak Parekh Committee appointed by the UTI has made wide-ranging
recommendations, including for restructuring of the US-64 scheme and for granting
tax incentives. We are taking necessary action. I will come to the tax incentives
shortly. The details of the restructuring are being announced separately in a press
release. This should lift the cloud of uncertainty from the capital market and restore
confidence.
38.
My tax proposals will also greatly strengthen mutual funds and thereby
help bring small retail investors back into the capital market. It has also been decided
to set up a joint mechanism between SEBI and the Department of Company Affairs
for taking stringent action against unscrupulous promoters who raise money from
investors and misutilise them.
Expenditure Management
39.
The high rate of growth of non-developmental expenditure by Government
is a growing and critical source of concern. I propose the following initiatives:
*

The most effective and lasting solution to this problem is to begin the process
of downsizing Government. We are making an immediate beginning by

13

abolishing four Secretary-level posts through a process of merger and
rationalisation of Central Government departments. This will take effect
on April 1, 1999.
*

To carry this process forward in a systematic way towards reducing the
role and the administrative structure of the Government, we will constitute
an Expenditure Reforms Commission headed by an eminent and experienced
person.

*

In preparation for the next Budget, I propose to initiate a system of Zero
Base Budgeting.

*

To promote transparency and curb the growth of contingent government
liabilities, Government has decided to establish a Guarantee Redemption
Fund with an initial corpus of Rs.50 crore. I encourage all State Governments
to set up similar Funds.

Public
Sector Reform/Disinvestment/Privatisation
40.
Government’s strategy towards public sector enterprises will continue to
encompass a judicious mix of strengthening strategic units, privatising non-strategic
ones through gradual disinvestment or strategic sale and devising viable rehabilitation
strategies for weak units.
41.
The disinvestment programme of the Government draws primarily upon
the recommendations of the Disinvestment Commission. The Commission has so
far submitted 8 Reports containing recommendations for 43 Public Sector Enterprises
(PSEs). These recommendations are in various stages of implementation. Government
will be referring more PSEs to it for its valued opinion. In 1999-2000, I propose to
raise Rs.10,000 crore through the disinvestment programme. This will help the
Government to fund the requirements of social and infrastructure sectors. Equally
important, it will lead to improvements in productivity and profitability of these
enterprises and also to the further development of domestic capital markets.
42.
Government have been providing budgetary support to Central PSEs for
rationalising manpower under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). However,
such assistance has generally been restricted to loss making enterprises. There are
a number of enterprises which are marginally profit-making and which need to reduce
manpower to remain viable but do not have the resource to finance such
rationalisation exercises. Government would encourage such enterprises to raise
money from banks against Government guarantees and interest subsidy.
43.
In order to reduce the burden on budget on account of the implementation
of VRS, Government will also encourage PSEs to issue bonds to the workers opting
for VRS. Government will guarantee the repayment of such bonds and also reimburse
fully the interest payments. RBI will be requested to issue necessary instructions to
banks to accept bonds as collateral for loans to workers who may need assistance.
44.
The need for timely and reliable statistics for policy formulation and planning
cannot be over emphasised. There is reason to believe that with progressive
dismantling of the system of economic controls, the quality of data flows has weakened.
Government has decided to establish a National Statistical Commission to critically
examine the deficiencies of the present statistical system with a view to recommending
measures for a systematic revamping of the system.

14

45.
We stand today at the edge of the second millennium. We must, therefore,
prepare for the opportunities and challenges of the next century and millennium. It
is time to seriously debate and decide on the second generation reforms that we
must put in place to make India economically strong and fully capable of competing
successfully in the evolving world order. To further this process, I plan to bring a
discussion paper before Parliament before the end of this Budget Session. My goal is
to help build a consensus on the basic issues so that we can act more decisively to
raise the growth in income, output and employment in our economy to a higher,
sustainable level.
Revised Estimates for 1998-99
46.
The non-Plan expenditure has increased by Rs.17,616 crore. There is a
shortfall of Rs.3,631 crore under Plan. The normal non-Plan expenditure of the
Government departments has increased only by Rs.2,539 crore. The other increases
are on account of loans to States and UTs against net Small Savings collections,
Rs.9,588 crore, pension, Rs.2,711 crore, interest payments, Rs.2,248 crore, and
postal deficit, Rs.530 crore.
47.
Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated at Rs.1,09,537 crore against
Rs.1,16,857 crore budgeted, reflecting a shortfall of Rs.7,320 crore. The shortfall is
mainly due to lower customs revenue on account of both lower volume and unitprice of imports and lower excise revenue resulting from low industrial growth.
Disinvestment receipts are expected to be Rs.8,000 crore against Rs.5,000 crore
budgeted.
48.
The fiscal deficit is thus likely to increase to 6.5% of GDP from the budget
target of 5.6% on the basis of comparable GDP estimates. However, if the increase
over budget in small savings loans to States and Union Territories is excluded, the
adjusted fiscal deficit would be 5.9%.
Budget Estimates for 1999-2000
49.
In the budget estimates for 1999-2000, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.2,84,003 crore, of which Rs.77,000 crore is for Plan and Rs.2,07,003 crore for
non-Plan.
Plan Expenditure
50.
The budget support for Central, State and UT Plans has been placed at
Rs.77,000 crore, marking an increase of Rs.8,629 crore over revised estimates
1998-99. Following the direction of the Prime Minister, the Plan for 1999-2000
focuses on basic human development needs such as education, health care,
social welfare, housing, and water supply. Thus, out of the total Gross Budgetary
Support of Rs.44,000 crore for the Central Plan 1999-2000, Rs.31,035 crore has
been provided to 18 Ministries/Departments covered by the Prime Minister’s Special
Action Plan. Total Central Plan outlay at Rs.1,03,521 crore will be more by Rs.15,039
crore from the last year’s level of Rs.88,482 crore. Gross budgetary support for the
Central Plan is being enhanced from Rs.38,263 crore in the revised estimates
1998-99 to Rs.44,000 crore.
51.
Compared to revised estimates 1998-1999, outlay for Plan programmes
has been significantly increased in certain priority sectors. For example, the increase
is 34.5% in the Agriculture and Allied Activities and 21.9% in Social Services.

15

52.
Central Plan assistance to States and Union Territories in 1999-2000 is
placed at Rs.33,000 crore as compared to Rs.30,108 crore in the revised estimates
1998-99. Assistance for Basic Minimum Services and Slum Development Schemes
is proposed to be enhanced from Rs.3,684 crore to Rs.4,043 crore.
53.
Last year, I had announced a non-lapsable pool for the North East. I am
glad to inform you that we have already released Rs.98 crore for projects in the
North East out of the savings from the budget of different Central Ministries.
Non Plan Expenditure
54.
Non-Plan expenditure in 1999-2000 is estimated to be Rs.2,07,003 crore
compared to Rs.2,13,541 crore in revised estimates 1998-99. This would have actually
been Rs.2,32,003 crore but for a change in the system of accounting of loans to
States and UTs against net Small Savings collections with effect from 1.4.99. The
changeover, which is in the interest of transparency and viability of the Small Savings
schemes, is being made in deference to a suggestion in the Inter State Council in
December 1998 on delinking the small savings from Central Government’s fiscal
deficit concerns. A Committee set up under the chairmanship of Shri R.V. Gupta
has gone into the issue. Based on the Committee’s recommendations and with the
concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the transactions will
now be under a newly created National Small Savings Fund in the Public Account,
which will reflect the Treasury Banking nature of these operations. A copy of the
Committee’s report is being placed in the library of the Parliament for Hon’ble
Members’ information.
55.
Major items of increase in non-Plan expenditure are Interest payments,
Rs.10,752 crore, Defence expenditure, Rs.4,494 crore, and grants to States, Rs.3,621
crore. A provision of Rs.1,735 crore has been made for non-Plan loans to public
sector enterprises mainly for payment of salaries and wages to the employees of sick
and convalescent PSUs.
Rs.45,694 crore are being provided for Defence expenditure against Rs.41,200
56.
crore in revised estimates 1998-99. Further need based budgetary support will be
provided during the course of the year.
Revenue Receipts
57.
Before I proceed to detail my tax proposals, I would like to highlight the
position of fiscal deficit in 1999-2000, if the existing rates of taxes and tariffs are
continued. Gross tax revenues would then be Rs.1,67,526 crore and the Centre’s
net tax revenue would be Rs.1,22,730 crore. Non-tax revenues are estimated to
increase from Rs.48,128 crore in revised estimates 1998-99 to Rs.50,475 crore this
year. The net revenue receipts for the Centre, including non-tax receipts, would
increase from Rs.1,57,664 crore in revised estimates 1998-99 to Rs.1,73,205 crore
in 1999-2000. After taking into account receipts of Rs.10,000 crore from disinvestment
of equity in public sector enterprises, the fiscal deficit would be Rs.89,713 crore.
This is unacceptably high. I shall now come to my proposals to reduce the deficit.

16

PART B
58.

Sir, I now present my tax proposals.

59.
I will start with indirect taxes, with excise first. The multiple rates of indirect
tax are generally recognised to be a major source of misclassification, tax evasion
and avoidance and cumbersome litigation. The multiplicity also encourages inefficient
allocation of resources. Over a 100 countries in the world now enjoy the benefits of
a Value Added Tax (VAT) with very small number of rates in each case.
60.
In my last Budget, I had clearly stated my resolve to rationalise the ratestructure so as to reduce the multiplicity of rates and ensure convergence towards a
central rate with a merit rate and a demerit rate. Most of our major industry
associations have also called for a triple rate excise structure.
61.
My excise proposals today largely fulfil my intent announced 9 months
ago. Specifically, I propose to reduce the existing 11 major ad valorem rates to 3,
namely, a central rate of 16%, a merit rate of 8% and a demerit rate of 24%. To
achieve this, I propose to:
*

Merge the existing rates of 5%, 10% and 12% into the existing 8% rate;

*

Create a new rate of 16% by merging the existing 13%, 15% and 18% rates
into it; and

*

Fix a new rate of 24% in substitution of the existing rate of 25%.

Honourable Members may notice that I have reduced the previously announced
central rate of 18% to 16%. This means lower costs and prices. There is also a happy
coincidence that this rate is almost identical to the rate of one-sixth (Shadbhaga)
advised by Kautilya, the noble sage of Pataliputra, which also happens to be my
birthplace.
62.
Considerations of revenue in this difficult year, however, persuade me to
fix 2 slabs of surcharge (special duty of excise) of 6% and 16% over the rate of 24%
on commodities which today carry a rate of duty of 30% and 40%. Thus total excise
on these commodities will remain unchanged. Petrol will continue to be taxed at
32%. The surcharge structure gives a clear indication that in future the Government
would gradually phase them down to the demerit rate of 24%.
63.
As a result of these changes the excise rates for many commodities will
either come down, or remain unchanged or be adjusted marginally upwards by a 1%
point. In the one major area of machinery and capital goods where the basic rate is
rising from 13% to 16%, I must point out that excise on such products are eligible
for MODVAT credit in the hands of the buyer. Furthermore, to help the capital
goods sector, my customs duty proposals include removal of the long standing anomaly
by which the duty rate on the major input, steel, is higher than the duty rate on
finished capital goods. I must also emphasise that this major reform of the excise
rate structure is broadly revenue neutral. It does not impose additional tax burden
on industry as a whole. I am confident this major reform will stimulate productivity,
growth and employment.

17

64.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now move on to my next proposal. I propose to garner
additional revenue by way of an additional duty on High Speed Diesel Oil (HSD).
Currently, international and domestic prices of crude oil and petroleum products
are unusually soft, and it is felt that raising some additional revenue through this
commodity would be an equitable method of resource mobilisation. Therefore, I
propose an additional duty of Re. 1 per litre on imported and domestic HSD, the
revenue from which will accrue entirely to the Centre. Of this duty, I propose to
allocate half to support the initiatives in rural development and social sectors. The
other portion of 50 paise of this duty as also the duty of Re.1 per litre levied with
effect from 2.6.1998 will be converted into a statutory cess and transferred to the
Central Road Fund. 30% of the Fund will be transferred to the State Governments
for development and maintenance of State Roads. The balance amount will be utilised
for development and maintenance of National highways and expressways and by the
Ministry of Railways for construction of Railways over-bridges and Railways safety
works at unmanned Railways crossings. This will cover the gap in the plan resources
of the Ministry of Railways for the year 1999-2000. It is estimated that we will be
able to collect an aggregate amount of Rs.4,591 crore as additional duty of excise
and Rs.363 crore as countervailing duty on domestically produced and imported
HSD over the year. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas will announce
consequential changes in the price of HSD effective from midnight tonight. This will
also fulfil in a large measure the will of Parliament reflected in Resolution dated 13th
May, 1988, which contemplated earmarking a portion of the excise and customs
duties on petrol and diesel to raise resources for development of roads.
65.
In the last budget the MODVAT adjustment allowed to manufacturing units
had been capped at 95%. I propose to lift this cap on MODVAT claims and restore it
to 100%.
66.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, my budget proposals also contain a package for the Small
Scale Industry (SSI) sector consisting of the following components:
*
Under the specific excise duty concession schemes for units manufacturing
cosmetics, refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, I propose doubling
of the turn-over under the eligibility criteria from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.100
lakh; doubling of the duty free exemption slab from Rs.15 lakh to Rs.30
lakh; and, an increase from Rs.15 lakh to Rs.20 lakh in the clearances
eligible for duty at half the normal rates.
*
I propose to extend the benefit of the SSI exemption limits to small-scale
units producing cotton yarn.
*
I propose to exempt small job workers engaged in printing of glazed tiles
from the incidence of excise duty.
*
Currently, SSI units are not eligible for exemption from excise duty on
products bearing the brand name of another manufacturer. I propose to
extend the SSI exemption to goods bearing a brand name of another
manufacturer, when produced by units located in the rural areas. The details
of the scheme will be announced shortly.
67.
Under the current procedure, all manufacturing units are required to pay
excise duty at the time of clearance of goods from their manufacturing premises. As

18

a measure of further simplification of administrative procedures, I propose to permit
SSI units to pay excise duty on a monthly basis with effect from 1.6.1999. Besides
constituting a significant step in the simplification of procedures, this change will
also improve the liquidity position of manufacturing units in the SSI Sector.
68.
I am proposing a similar procedural relaxation in respect of the requirement
of maintenance of excise records by factories. Henceforth, factories paying more
than Rs.5 crore excise duty in a year, will not be required to maintain their records
in a specific format prescribed by the excise department; and, the records maintained
in the normal course of their functioning would be accepted as adequate. This
amendment will take effect from 1.6.99.
69.
Currently, there are several commodities, which are enjoying either total
exemption from excise duty or are enjoying concessional excise duty. These
concessions were sanctioned in the past with reference to the specific circumstances
relating to that commodity prevailing at that point of time. With the lowering of
general rate of duties, the need for such exemptions and concessions has abated. I
propose to set up an Expert Committee to examine and advise on where the
exemptions should be retained and where they should be integrated into the new
rate structure. Their report should be available for consideration before the next
budget.
70.
As Hon’ble Members are aware, Government is empowered to grant
exemptions from excise duty on an adhoc basis. I do not consider such wide discretion
necessary. Hence, I propose to abolish Government’s power to grant adhoc exemptions
of excise duty except for goods of strategic nature, or for charitable purposes. I
propose abolition of similar powers on the customs duty side also.
71.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to my proposals relating to customs duties. My
proposals here reflect a balance of differing considerations. On the one hand, we are
committed to a calibrated integration of our economy with the world economy. This
would entail further phasing down of our customs duties to Asian levels. On the
other hand, is the need to raise revenue and the fact that in a year of exceptional
turbulence and uncertainty in the world economy, our industry should be cushioned
against unusual surges of competitive pressure from imports.
72.
Sir, a special customs duty of 2% was imposed in the budget of 1996-97,
and a further special customs duty of 3% was imposed on certain items in 1997-98.
The special customs duty of 5% is in force till 31.3.1999. I have in the course of
another discussion assured this House that the period of validity of this special
customs duty will not be extended. I announce the discontinuance of the 5% special
customs duty with effect from 28.2.1999.
73.
After careful examination of various possibilities, and close interaction with
the apex organisations of Commerce and Industry, I propose to reduce the existing 7
major ad-valorem rates of customs duty to 5 basic rates. The new rates will be:
-

5% - which will remain unchanged;

-

15% by substituting the existing 10% rate;

-

25% by merging the 20% and 25% rates;

19

-

35% by merging the 30% and 35% rates;

-

40% - which will remain unchanged.

74.
The one industry in which a special regime of customs duty will apply is
the Information Technology sector. The Prime Minister has repeatedly emphasised
the importance of this sector for the country’s development in the new century and
millennium. Accordingly, I am proposing significant reduction in duty rates of a
number of critical inputs in this sector, such as ICs and micro assemblies, storage
devices and CD Roms, telecom equipment and optical fibres.
75.
To garner revenue to meet the country’s irreducible needs, I propose a
uniform surcharge of 10% on all commodities, excluding the following categories:
-

Crude Oil and Petroleum Products;

-

Items attracting 40% rate of basic duty;

-

Certain GATT- bound items;

-

Gold and Silver;

The effect of the surcharge would be to raise the basic rate by 10%. Thus a basic
rate of 5% would become 5.5%, 15% would become 16.5% and so on.
76.
Taking into account that special customs duty is being discontinued, and
that crude oil and petroleum products are exempt from surcharge, the effective
import duty rates on these products will stand reduced. This is consistent with the
Government’s established policy of rationalising indirect taxes on these products in
an agreed time-frame.
77.
By exempting items attracting 40% rate of basic duty from the surcharge,
there is a modest but clear reduction in the peak rate of protective custom duty from
45% to 40%.
78.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, conceptually, I am averse to zero custom duty, since our
domestic industry generally merits some minimal protection.
I have reviewed the
entire list of such commodities and to begin with I am proposing the imposition of
5% rate of duty for some of these commodities. In order to mitigate the impact of the
incidence of 5% rate of duty on such items which have previously enjoyed exemption,
I propose to exempt this category from the existing 4% special additional duty.
79.
I am rationalising the import duty structure of project imports. Under
this rationalisation, power generation, coal mining, refinery, telecom and fertilizer
projects will now attract a nominal basic customs duty of only 5%. However, they
will be subject to applicable rates of countervailing duty. The net impact of these
changes will not be significant in most cases. Mega Power Projects also will be an
exception to this.
80.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, as a result of the various proposals made in this
budget on the indirect taxes, the estimated revenue in 1999-2000 would be
Rs.1,17,625 crore, including a component of net additional resource mobilisation
of Rs.6,234 crore .

20

81.
Last year, I had announced the setting up of an Authority for Advance
Rulings for Excise and Customs. The necessary legislation has been included in
this Finance Bill. Drawn on the lines of the Advance Rulings Authority on the Direct
Taxes, the proposed Authority would provide binding rulings on important issues,
so that intending investors will have a clear-cut indication of their duty liability in
advance.
82.
The Central Board of Excise & Customs has adopted a “Vision Document”
and the “Citizens Charter” which together present a blue print for the future and the
service standards that can be expected of the Customs and Excise Department. The
compliance of the service standards set out in the Charter is being closely monitored.
The Commissioners of Customs and field level officers have been directed to enhance
the quality of their service and have also been told that any non-compliance would
be viewed adversely.
83.
On the central excise side, the computerisation of assessment and audit
operations is being given focussed attention, and before long, electronic filing of
returns is proposed to be put into operation.
84.
Copies of the notifications giving effect to proposed changes in customs
and excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
85.

Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to the proposals on the direct tax side.

86.
With growing liberalisation of the economy has come the need for industrial
restructuring so that companies can focus better on their core activities. The corporate
sector has been voicing the need for a flexible fiscal policy for regulating business reorganisations. In response to this need, I propose a comprehensive set of amendments
to the Income Tax Act to make such business re-organisations fully tax neutral. In
the case of amalgamation of companies, the existing requirement of routing the
proposal through Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is being removed.
The legal provision is proposed to be amended so that the eligibility for tax concessions
is only contingent upon a minimum of 75% of the fixed assets of the amalgamating
company being absorbed in the amalgamated company, and subject to the condition
that the amalgamated company will continue the business of the amalgamating
company for a minimum of 5 years. An enabling provision will be provided through
the amendment of the Income-Tax Act, for the detailed guidelines to be issued
subsequently under the powers available from the statutory provision.
87.
In the case of de-mergers, I propose to introduce a legal provision so as to
permit the carry forward of accumulated losses and unabsorbed depreciation from
the de-merging company to the resultant company. I also propose to amend the
legal provisions so that, neither the companies involved, nor the shareholders, are
subject to capital gains tax as a result of the transactions. Further, it is proposed
that all fiscal concessions will survive for the unexpired period in the case of
amalgamation and de-mergers
88.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, Government has been greatly concerned about the
persisting sluggishness in the capital markets. Government is also distressed to
note the negative perception of some sections of the investing public in regard to the

21

schemes operated by the Unit Trust of India. Based on the recommendations of the
Committee headed by Shri Deepak Parekh, and also taking into account a large
number of suggestions offered by various experts in the field, I now propose a
substantial fiscal package to restore the confidence of the shareholders in the UTI,
and more generally to invigorate the capital markets.
89.
First, I propose to fully exempt from income tax all income from UTI and
other Mutual Funds received in the hands of the investors. This will not only reduce
the incidence of tax, but will eliminate the inconvenience faced by small investors in
paying tax and claiming refund in connection with income derived from such
investments.
90.
Presently if the income in the hands of the investors is fully exempt from
tax, this income is subjected to dividend tax under Section 115 (O) of the Income Tax
Act, at the stage of distribution of the dividend by UTI or mutual funds. As a departure
from the policy, and as the second element of the package, I propose to continue for
3 years the exemption for US-64, Scheme as also for all open-ended equity-oriented
schemes of UTI and mutual funds - with more than 50% investment in equity - from
dividend tax. However, income distributed by Mutual Funds, where the equity
investment is less than 50%, will become subject to the 10% dividend tax.
91.
As a result of these two tax initiatives, investments in UTI and other Mutual
Funds will become much more attractive and equity-oriented schemes will be relatively
more attractive than schemes where equity investment is less than 50%. This should
encourage the return of small investor to the capital market and revive confidence.
92.
A complaint has often been voiced that there is discrimination between the
rate of long-term capital gains tax on transfer of shares and securities as between
residents and non-residents. The current rate of long-term capital gains tax for
resident Indians is 20% linked to a notional value of capital gains, computed with
reference to a Cost of Inflation Index. However, the rate of long-term capital gains
tax for non residents is only 10%. In response to this complaint, I now propose to
amend the law so as to cap the long-term capital gains tax for resident Indians on
transfer of shares and securities, at the 10% rate.
93.
In some of the ‘sunrise’ sectors of the economy, the management is adopting
a policy of offering stock options and Sweat Equity, to their employees. The tax
implications of such transactions are somewhat ambiguous. Therefore, I propose in
this budget to make certain amendments in the law, to put it beyond doubt that
such stock options will be taxed as a perquisite at the time of exercise of the option
by the employee, and later as capital gains at the time of sale of the security. These
amendments, I expect, will remove the grey areas which exist in the current law
relating to such transactions.
94.
For boosting high-tech sectors and supporting first generation
entrepreneurs, there is an acute need for higher investment in venture capital
activities. Very recently we have relaxed the guidelines under the existing scheme by
removing the requirement for time-bound investment and minimum lock-in-period
of funds. I am also harmonising the guidelines for registration of venture capital
activity with the Central Board of Direct Taxes, with those for registration with the

22

Security and Exchange Board of India. This will ensure uniformity in norms for
registration with both the organisations. I am confident that these initiatives will
increase the attractiveness of the Venture Capital Scheme and induce high networth investors to commit their funds to the ‘sunrise’ sectors, particularly, the
Information Technology Sector.
95.
Very recently, the Companies Act, 1956 has been amended to permit
transactions relating to buy- back of shares. There is some ambiguity in the
interpretation of the law as to whether such transactions would be treated as subject
to dividend tax in addition to capital gains tax. In view of this, I propose to amend
the law to put it beyond doubt that on buy-back of shares, the shareholders will not
be subject to dividend tax, and would only be liable to capital gains tax.
96.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I wish to now turn to another area of special focus in this
budget, namely the Housing Sector. In regard to this sector, I propose a comprehensive
package of fiscal incentives focussed at:
*

the middle class investors wishing to purchase a dwelling unit;

*

the promoters of middle income housing projects; and

*

the housing finance companies.

97.
As the first element of this package, I propose that the interest on a loan for
a self-occupied property be exempted from tax up to a ceiling of Rs.75,000, increased
from the current ceiling of Rs.30,000. This concession will encourage middle class
investors to take loans to purchase modest dwelling units of their own.
98.
The second element of this incentive package relates to the scheme for
housing projects for enjoying a tax holiday under Section 80IA of the Income Tax
Act. The existing provision, inter-alia, requires that the built -up area of dwelling
units should not exceed 1000 sq. feet. There have been many representations that
in towns other than Mumbai and Delhi, the land cost is relatively less, and therefore,
for the same capital expenditure investors can afford to purchase dwelling units of
slightly larger areas. In view of this, it has been represented that the ceiling on built
-up areas for dwelling units in approved projects be increased from 1000 sq. ft to
1500 sq. ft at all locations except Mumbai and Delhi. I propose to accept this
suggestion and make suitable modifications in the law. This amendment in the scheme
for treating housing projects as infrastructure will, I believe, also give a significant
fillip to construction activities in the smaller towns.
99.
For the construction activity to pick up any significant degree of momentum,
it has to be ensured that housing finance companies stay financially viable. Currently,
such housing finance companies are subject to tax on interest on loans, on accrual
basis. In order to lessen the burden on such housing finance companies, I propose
to amend the law so that the income of such companies will be taxable on actual
basis, rather than accrual basis.
1 0 0 . A significant number of individuals seeking accommodation in the major
cities are the employees of the business sector. I feel that it is necessary to encourage
the business sector to invest in housing for their employees so as to add to the net
housing stock. In this spirit, I propose to increase the depreciation rate from 20% to
40% on new dwelling units purchased by the business sector for its employees.

23

1 0 1 . This entire package of fiscal incentives for the housing construction sector
will, I believe, be a powerful force for revival of the entire economy. The construction
sector has very strong linkages with several other major sectors, notably steel and
cement. A general upsurge in construction activities will not only increase the
corpus of housing stock in the country, but will give a substantial fillip to industrial
activity.
1 0 2 . Apprehensions have been expressed in certain quarters regarding the
incidence of a high level of Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in some of the banks. I am
of the view that the banks should make every effort to clean up their books and to
remove any misgivings, which may exist about the transparency of the accounts. To
assist in this direction, Mr. Speaker, Sir, I propose to make tax deductible such
amounts as are provided by banks as ‘doubtful debts’ subject to a maximum of 5%
of the such aggregate ‘doubtful debts’, in any one year. This concession will be
available for a period of 5 years for such ‘doubtful debts’ as are identified under the
prudential norms prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India.
1 0 3 . I propose to amend the law so that tax concession will be available to a
loanee on interest payment to a co-operative bank on actual basis rather than accrual
basis. This proposal will induce the loanees to make timely repayment of their
interest liability in order to avail of the tax benefit, and correspondingly, the financial
condition of the co-operative banks can be expected to improve.
1 0 4 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to the proposals relating to the Infrastructure
and Industry sectors.
*
*

*

*

I propose to extend the fiscal incentives by way of the tax holiday under
Section 80 IA of the Income Tax Act, to cold chains for agricultural produce.
The financial condition of most of State Electricity Boards is extremely
precarious. Many of the State Electricity Boards wish to remedy the situation
by unbundling generation, transmission and distribution activities to
separate companies. I propose to treat the activities of transmission and
distribution of power, set up after 1.4.1999, as eligible activities for fiscal
incentives available to infrastructure units. I am sanguine that this proposal
will facilitate the restructuring and rehabilitation of the State Electricity
Boards.
Currently, the tax exemption given under Section 80 IA of the Income Tax
Act to the infrastructure sector and other core sectors, has to be availed of
within a given maximum period. This given maximum period has come to
vary from sector to sector. In order to bring about uniformity, I propose the
amendment of the Income Tax Act so as to provide a maximum period of 15
years in which units can avail of the tax concessions offered to infrastructure
and other core sector units.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am conscious of the fact that, despite all our
announcements, the industrial development in North Eastern Region has
not come up to our expectations. To give industrialisation a fillip in this
area of the country, I propose a 10 year tax holiday for all industries set up
in Growth Centres, Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporations,
and for other specified industries, in the North Eastern Region. I would
urge the industrial entrepreneurs from this part of the country to seize the

24

opportunity and set up modern, high value added manufacturing units in
the region.
1 0 5 . The Indian entertainment industry, which includes films, music and
television software is growing by leaps and bounds. I believe that with our creativity
and our talent, India has the potential to become a global media superpower. We
have done remarkably well in the field of computer software development and exports,
and the same can be achieved in the development and export entertainment industry
products, specially films, TV, software and music. With a view to facilitating India
becoming a super power in this sector, I am including a number of measures in the
budget. My aim is to give similar facilities and tax benefits to this sector as are
available to the export of goods and merchandise under section 80HHC.
1 0 6 . Let me assure you that it would be our endeavour to support the
entertainment industry “Dil Se”, and I am sure that no longer would the industry
have to ask the government “Hum Apke Hain Kaun”?
1 0 7 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, we are all conscious of the fact that the Information
Technology sector is going to be the sector of the future. The immediate crisis,
which is looming over this sector, is connected with the Y2K Problem, which will hit
us at the close of the current calendar year. I get the impression that the corporate
sector is not adequately seized of the dangers which lie ahead on account of this
problem. In these circumstances, to assist the business sector to overcome the Y2K
Problem, I propose that all expenditure incurred in making their systems Y2K
compliant be allowed as revenue expenditure in the next financial year. I urge the
business sector to avail of this concession and make every effort to remedy the
defect in their software systems, so that their valuable databases do not spin into
chaos.
1 0 8 . Under the current law, a weighted deduction of 125% of the expenditure
made on in-house R&D is available to corporate houses up to 31.3.2000.
Representations have been received that this period is too short for any company to
plan its R&D programme. I propose to extend the concession for in-house R&D up to
31.3.2005. Further, I propose to extend a similar concession of permitting a weighted
deduction of 125% of expenditure for R&D Projects entrusted to research laboratories
and universities. In the globalised economy, the future is for those who are in the
vanguard of development of technology. In view of this, I would urge the corporate
sector to avail of this facility to the fullest extent.
1 0 9 . In the last few years, the direct tax department has undertaken a concerted
drive to extend the national tax base. As a method of identifying potential taxpayers,
the “One by Six” scheme was extended to 35 cities in 1998-99. This Scheme has
given very satisfying results. Consequent upon the launching of this scheme, the
number of tax assessees has risen from 120 lakh to 140 lakh in the period of one
year. It is the assessment of the department that there is considerable scope for
further registration of tax assessees. In view of the favourable results of the scheme,
I now propose to extend this scheme to 19 more cities in the country having a
population of more than 5 lakh.
1 1 0 . Since the last budget, the Income Tax department has undertaken a drive
for issue of PAN Numbers to the tax-paying applicants. The response of this scheme

25

has been overwhelming, and we have received as many as 168 lakh applications.
The requisite PAN Numbers have already been issued to 75 lakh taxpayers and we
are confident that the remaining applications will be disposed in the next few months.
1 1 1 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I will now like to highlight the proposals which are targeted
at those sections of society which require Government’s special attention. First, I
propose that the deduction for medical insurance premia for senior citizens be raised
from the current level of Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000 and tax deduction for treatment of
specific diseases be increased to Rs.60,000. Considering the fact that medical and
hospitalisation costs have risen and life expectancy has also improved, the general
insurance industry intends to increase the upper ceiling of the sum insured under
the mediclaim policy from the existing level of Rs.3 lakh to Rs.5 lakh, and the upper
age limit for coverage to 80 years from the existing 75 years. Second, I propose that
expenditure made in respect of hostel projects for working women be eligible for
deduction from taxable income under Section 35AC of the Income-Tax Act. Third, I
propose that pension received by the recipients of the different gallantry award
winners, and the family pension received by their heirs, be exempted from income
tax.
1 1 2 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now submit my last proposal on direct taxes. I face the
difficult task of containing the revenue and fiscal deficits on the one hand, and on
the other meeting the growing development expenditure. I propose to fulfil this task
and also ensure equitable burden sharing. I am making a modest demand only on
those sections of our society who have the capacity to pay while exempting lowincome earners. With these considerations, I propose to impose an across-the-board
surcharge of 10% on Corporate Tax, and also a 10% surcharge on all other categories
of assessees. In respect of individuals and Hindu Undivided Families, the applicability
of the surcharge is limited to those having total income of Rs.60,000 or more. In
effect, this surcharge will mean an increase of a marginal 2% in the 20% slab & 3%
in the 30% slab. It would leave the rate in the 10% slab unchanged. This is in the
nature of a temporary surcharge. I trust that the House and our citizens will appreciate
the circumstances in which I have had to make this proposal.
1 1 3 . To sum up, Mr. Speaker, Sir, as a result of the various proposals made in
this budget on the direct taxes, the estimated revenue in 1999-2000 would be
Rs.59,235 crore, including a component of net additional resource mobilisation of
Rs.3,100 crore.
1 1 4 . I now have something to say on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of
Communications.
Postal Service is highly employment intensive and salary &
allowances constitute a major part of the operating expenses of the Postal Department.
A revision of tariff for some postal services has, therefore, become unavoidable.
However, in the interest of the common man and the role of the postal services in
easy dissemination of news and information there will be no change in the tariff for
Postcard, Money orders, Book packets containing printed books and Registered
newspapers. However, the rate of Printed Postcard is being raised from Rs.1.50 to
Rs.2.00, of Competition Postcard from Rs.3.00 to Rs.4.00, of Inland letter from Rs.1.50
to Rs.2.00, of Book pattern and sample packets from Re.1.00 to Rs.2.00 for first 50
grams or part thereof and from Rs.2.00 to Rs.3.00 for every additional 50 grams or

26

part thereof, and Parcels from Rs.10.00 to Rs.12.00 for a weight not exceeding 500
grams or part thereof and from Rs.10.00 to Rs.15.00 for every additional 500 grams
or part thereof. There are also certain other changes, which are explained in the
Memorandum circulated along with the budget documents. The changes would take
effect from a date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed. The revisions proposed
are estimated to yield additional revenue of about Rs.145 crore in a full year and
about Rs.121 crore during 1999-2000. Even this modest increase which is necessary
for sustaining postal development, will only partially meet the cost of various services.
1 1 5 . As a result of the postal tariff revision, total expenditure of the Central
Government for the year 1999-2000 would be marginally reduced to Rs.2,83,882
crore while with my tax and other proposals, net revenue receipts and non-debt
capital receipts would increase to Rs.2,03,927 crore. The revenue deficit is placed
at Rs.54,147 crore, while the fiscal deficit is placed at Rs.79,955 crore. This amounts
to 2.7% and 4.0% respectively on the basis of the new series of GDP announced by
Central Statistical Organisation and after excluding the payment of the share of
small savings collection to State Governments. Based on the old series of GDP and
excluding the payment of the share of small savings collection to State Governments,
the percentage works out to 3.0% and 4.4% respectively.
1 1 6 . With the Budget for 1999-2000, we will have set in motion a medium-term
strategy for restoring the fiscal health of our economy. This budget proposes to
reduce the revenue and fiscal deficits by 0.7% and 0.6% of GDP, respectively. At this
rate of reduction, the revenue deficit will be eliminated in 4 years and the fiscal
deficit will have declined below 2% of GDP. The budget proposes major reform of our
excise taxes. In the medium-term we will move to a single rate and a full-fledged VAT
system. Our customs duty structure will be phased down to Asian levels in 5 years.
During this period Indian industry will have restructured and become fully competitive
in world markets. Our knowledge-based industries will generate lakhs of jobs. The
gains from competition and productivity growth will drive our exports to new heights.
Over the same period our physical and human infrastructure will be raised close to
world class. Above all, the basic needs of all our people for food, shelter, health,
education and employment will be met within a decade from now.
1 1 7 . These achievements will transform India into a genuine economic super
power by the year 2020. The twenty-first century belongs to us.
1 1 8 . In the words of the Prime Minister Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee -

+ÉÉÄJÉÉå àÉå ´Éè£É´É BÉEä ºÉ{ÉxÉä,
{ÉMÉ àÉå iÉÚ{ÉEÉxÉÉå BÉEÉÒ MÉÉÊiÉ cÉä,
®É-]Å£ÉÉÎBÉDiÉ BÉEÉ V´ÉÉ® xÉ âóBÉEiÉÉ,
+ÉÉA ÉÊVÉºÉ-ÉÊVÉºÉ BÉEÉÒ ÉÊcààÉiÉ cÉä**
With dreams of prosperity and marching at a stormy pace, the tide of patriotism
will not recede. Let the courageous come forward to join me.
1 1 9 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the budget to this august
House.

