1

Budget

1995-96

Speech of
Shri Manmohan Singh
Minister of Finance
15th March, 1995
PART A
Sir,
I

rise to present the Budget for 1995-96.

2.
Four years have passed since our Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, took office in the midst of an unprecedented
economic crisis. Our immediate task was to save the nation from a relentless slide
into the abyss of falling production, soaring inflation and deepening poverty. We
dealt swiftly with the immediate crisis and we also worked towards a broader
objective of shifting the economy on to a path of rapid, employment-generating
growth. Our aim was to raise India to her rightful place in the comity of nations.
3.
Sometimes, in the heat of political debate, we lose sight of what has
already been achieved. Let me take a few minutes to outline how far we have come
since those grim days of 1991:
·

The growth of our economy had fallen to less than one per cent in 199192. We brought the economy back to a growth of 4.3 per cent per year in
the two years thereafter, and growth has accelerated further to 5.3 per
cent in 1994-95. Few countries can claim as quick and smooth a recovery
from as deep an economic crisis.

·

Industrial growth had collapsed to about half of one per cent in 1991-92.
Today, Indian industry is experiencing a vibrant, broad-based recovery
with industrial growth of 8.7 per cent in April-November, 1994. The
manufacturing sector is growing even faster at 9.2 per cent and the capital
goods sector is growing at 24.7 per cent. I hope that those critics who
predicted that our industrial and trade reforms would hurt Indian industry
will look at the reality and think again.

·

There are signs of a strong revival in domestic industrial investment in
1994-95 as Indian industry modernises and upgrades technology, and
improves competitiveness. Foreign direct investment is also responding
1

2

well to the new policies, with large investments flowing into key
infrastructure sectors such as Power and Telecommunications.
·

Foodgrain production had fallen to 168 million tonnes in 1991-92. This
year, it will be an all-time record of 185 million tonnes. Our farmers have
clearly benefited from the policy of offering remunerative prices and have
returned a strong production performance.

·

Public stocks of foodgrain, which provide an invaluable insurance against
bad weather and other contingencies, had declined to 14.7 million tonnes
three years ago. They have been rebuilt to a record level of 31 million
tonnes, as on January 1, 1995.

·

Growth has created new jobs for our people. In 1991-92, total employment
grew by only about 3 million. In each of the two years thereafter,
employment increased twice as fast, with about 6 million new jobs added
each year. The increase is expected to be even higher in 1994-95. The
drawing room Cassandras, who predicted massive unemployment as a
consequence of the reforms, have been conclusively proved wrong.

·

The inability to manage our external payments was the immediate cause
of our collapse in 1991. I am sure, Honourable Members are aware of the
remarkable change that has taken place in this area. The dollar value of
exports fell by 1.5 per cent in 1991-92. In 1994-95 our exports have
grown by over 17 per cent in the first 10 months. This follows a 20 per
cent increase in 1993-94. Imports have also grown in line with the revival
of the economy but the balance of payments situation is comfortable.

·

The fears that were voiced in some quarters that our trade policy would
generate a disruptive flood of imports and weaken the economy have been
shown to be completely unfounded. Liberalisation and openness have
actually increased our self-reliance. Exports now finance over 90 per cent
of imports, compared to only about 60 per cent in the latter half of the
eighties. The external deficit on current account was over 3 per cent of
GDP in 1990-91. It is expected to be less than 1/2 per cent in 1994-95.

·

At the time of the crisis, our external debt was rising at the rate of 8
billion dollars a year. In 1993-94, the increase in external debt was reduced
to less than one billion dollars. In the first half of 1994-95, our external
debt stock actually declined by almost 300 million dollars.

·

Our foreign currency reserves had fallen to barely one billion dollars in
June 1991. On March 10, 1995 they stood at over 20 billion dollars.

· A key element of our strategy was to give top priority to strengthening antipoverty programmes, once the initial crisis was overcome. We have fulfilled this
promise. Plan expenditure on employment and anti-poverty programmes in the
Central Sector has been increased very sharply in the last two budgets. The allocation
for Rural Development has been more than doubled from Rs.3100 crore in 199293 (BE) to over Rs.7000 crore in 1994-95 (BE). Over the same period the allocation
for Elementary Education was increased by 84 per cent, for Adult Education by 78
per cent and for Health by 91 per cent.
4 . These indicators testify to a remarkable turnaround, in a relatively short
time. We inherited an economy near collapse four years ago. We have transformed

3

it into an economy showing strong growth in agricultural and industrial output, a
strong revival of domestic investment, a steady increase in foreign direct investment,
renewed growth of employment and a comfortable foreign exchange position. This
is the result of the hard work of our farmers and industrial workers, our managers
and exporters, combined with the far sighted economic policies implemented by the
government under the leadership of Prime Minister Shri P.V.Narasimha Rao. What
is most encouraging is the emergence of a broad national consensus in support of
reforms, a consensus which vindicates our strategy of moving forward steadily and
surely on the path of reform.
5 . We have come a long way, but the journey is far from over. We need to
redouble our efforts in several areas to consolidate our gains, and push the economy
to even better performance. This is both feasible and also necessary to achieve our
goals. Reforms in the areas of taxation, trade and industrial policies and the financial
sector have yielded good results. They need to be completed as planned, so as to
enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of our economy. Barriers to further
expansion of agriculture have to be identified and lifted. The public sector has to be
revamped. Industrial relations have to provide for greater flexibility in deployment
of labour. Delivery systems for social services have to be modernised, plugging
loopholes and promoting cost effectiveness. Capital market reforms have to be
widened and deepened to strengthen investor protection. Insurance sector reforms
have to be pursued with the aim of greatly widening access to insurance services
and promoting competitive and efficient customer-oriented services. We must and
will push ahead in all these areas.
6 . There are also some weak spots, which have surfaced and need to be addressed
urgently. After the initial successes in fiscal consolidation, further progress has
proved much more difficult. The fiscal deficit increased sharply in 1993-94 and the
pressure on the deficit has continued in 1994-95. These developments must be
countered through determined action. If we try to fund every project and programme
irrespective of the revenues available, we only generate high inflation, high interest
rates which choke off investment, and a proliferation of under-funded, incomplete
projects. This approach will only jeopardise our basic objective of development with
social justice since it is the poor who will suffer most from the resultant inflation
and slow growth of employment opportunities. We must, therefore, ensure that
fiscal discipline is further improved in the years ahead.
7 . Inflation has surfaced again as a serious problem. We had succeeded in
lowering the rate of inflation from the peak of 17 per cent in 1991 to around 7 per
cent in the middle of 1993, but since then inflation has accelerated again and
currently exceeds 11 per cent. This acceleration has occurred because of several
factors. One reason is the sharp increase in procurement prices in the previous
three years. Another factor is the shortfall in production in critical sectors such as
sugar, cotton and oilseeds. The persistence of fiscal deficits at levels higher than
they should be, has also contributed to inflationary pressure. Recognizing these
problems, we will tackle inflation on a priority basis in the year ahead.
8 . Monetary policy has already been tightened to reduce the growth of money
supply. Interest rates on bank deposits have been raised to give greater
encouragement to savings. Taking advantage of the improved foreign exchange

4

position, imports of key essential commodities, such as sugar, cotton, pulses and
edible oils have been freely allowed with zero or low duties to moderate inflationary
pressure. We are also taking advantage of the comfortable foodgrain stocks to
undertake continuous open market sales of wheat and rice with a view to moderating
price pressure in these items. The Public Distribution System (PDS) has been
strengthened and supplies through the PDS are being supplemented by necessary
imports of sugar and edible oils. Over the coming year, we will use all instruments
available to ensure stability in prices of wheat, rice and edible oils. Tariff and trade
policies will be deployed to ensure that domestic prices of industrial products do
not rise unduly. The consumer movement will be strengthened and Government
will be vigilant in curbing restrictive practices and hoarding. My revenue proposals,
to which I will come a little later, are also designed to check inflation in commodities
of mass consumption.
9 . Infrastructure is another area of potential weakness. If we are to aim at
economic growth of 7 to 8 per cent, which has been achieved in other countries and
which alone can provide the jobs we need for our growing labour force, then we
need much larger investment and much greater efficiency in key infrastructure
sectors such as power, roads, ports, irrigation, railways and telecommunications.
Sound financial management holds the key to progress in this area. Adequate
supply of quality infrastructure depends crucially on the financial viability of these
sectors, which in turn depends upon the adoption of reasonable cost recovery
policies. To take the example of power, many State Governments are unable to
finance new investment in power generation because of the financial weakness of
the State Electricity Boards. Taking advantage of the Central Government’s initiative
to encourage private investment in power generation, many State Governments are
actively trying to attract private sector investments into this area. But private
sector investors are unwilling to invest in Power unless the State Governments and
the Central Government provide guarantees and counter-guarantees to reassure
the private sector producers that they will be paid for the power they generate.
Such counter-guarantees are justifiable only if they are viewed as providing
temporary breathing space, during which State Electricity Boards undertake
necessary reforms of their institutional structure, operating practices and pricing
policies. In the long run, we cannot escape the reality that the users of electricity
must pay for its cost. The same criterion holds for other infrastructure sectors also.
Once financial viability is assured, we can expect a renewed surge of both public
sector and private sector investments in these areas.
1 0 . I shall now deal with some issues of social equity and poverty alleviation.
In my first Budget speech itself, I had emphasised that economic growth and
restructuring are not ends in themselves. They are only the means to improving
the lives of ordinary citizens. I wish to assure the House that this concern has been
central to our strategy from the very beginning. Experience in our own country, as
also from all over the world, shows that the surest antidote to poverty is rapid and
broad based growth. This is precisely what our economic reforms seek to achieve.
We also recognise that the fruits of growth will take time to reach some of the
poorest and weakest sections of our society. To ensure that they too derive benefit
in the short run, we have given the highest priority to strengthening programmes
of rural development, employment generation, primary education, primary health
and other key social sector programmes. These programmes, coupled with

5

accelerating economic growth over the last three years, are beginning to have
desirable effects on employment and poverty. I have already mentioned that total
employment is expanding much faster than three years ago. Real wages of
agricultural labourers had declined in 1991-92 during the crisis. They had increased
above pre-crisis levels by 1993-94. Available information on vital statistics, like the
crude death rate and the infant mortality rate, also indicates a clear recovery in
general living standards after 1991-92.
11.
The message is clear: the task of lifting the age-old burden of poverty
in our society is daunting, but we are on the right track. We must persevere with
our two-track strategy of accelerating growth, investment and modernisation on
the one track, and strengthening anti-poverty programmes on the other. The Central
Plan allocations and the tax proposals in this Budget are designed to advance both
elements of this strategy. Before coming to these proposals, I would like to outline
some new initiatives aimed at strengthening the income-earning opportunities for
the weaker segments of our society.
12.
Inadequacy of public investment in agriculture is today a matter of
general concern. This is an area which is the responsibility of the States, but many
States have neglected investment in infrastructure for agriculture. There are many
rural infrastructure projects, which have been started but are lying incomplete for
want of resources. They represent a major loss of potential income and employment
to the rural population. To encourage quicker completion of projects in rural
infrastructure, I propose to establish a new Rural Infrastructural Development
Fund within the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)
from April 1995. The Fund will provide loans to State Governments and State
owned Corporations for completing ongoing projects relating to medium and minor
irrigation, soil conservation, watershed management and other forms of rural
infrastructure. The loans will be on a project-specific basis with repayment and
interest guaranteed by the concerned State Government. Priority will be assigned
to projects which can be completed within the least time period. Resources for the
Fund will come from commercial banks which will be required by Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) to contribute an amount equivalent to a bank’s shortfall in achieving
the priority sector target for agricultural lending, subject to a maximum of 1.5 per
cent of the bank’s net credit. This is expected to create a corpus of about Rs.2,000
crore for completion of rural infrastructure projects.
13.
Our Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes citizens are amongst the
poorest members of our rural society. In the one hundred predominantly tribal
districts, NABARD will open an exclusive line of credit to Cooperatives and Regional
Rural Banks for meeting the credit needs of Scheduled Tribes. Rs.400 crore will be
earmarked for this purpose during 1995-96. NABARD will also earmark a further
Rs.100 crore for financing Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries
identified by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Corporations. This amount
would be available to the commercial and cooperative banks for meeting the
investment needs of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries in both
farm and non-farm activities.
14.
Khadi and village industries provide crucial non-farm earning
opportunities to our rural population. I propose to establish a new scheme under

6

which the banking system will provide Rs.1,000 crore on a consortium basis to the
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), which will lend to viable khadi
and village industry units, either directly or through State level Khadi and Village
Industries Boards (KVIBs). The Central and State Governments will guarantee these
loans by commercial banks to KVIC and KVIBs, respectively.
15.
The handloom sector employs millions of poor weavers. At present,
NABARD refinancing to this sector is restricted to the flow of credit through the
District and State Cooperative Banks. Henceforth, NABARD will extend refinancing
to commercial banks also for extending credit to cooperative handloom institutions.
Steps are also being taken to accelerate the flow of credit to the Handloom Centres
and Quality Dyeing Units coming under the scheme initiated last year.
16.
Our Small Scale Industries employ 14 million workers and account for
40 per cent of our total manufacturing output and 35 per cent of our exports. This
dynamic sector must be strengthened and assisted to better serve the goals of
growth, employment generation and self-reliance through exports. A Technology
Development and Modernization Fund will be established in the Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) to provide financial assistance to quality projects
aimed at strengthening the export capability of small-scale industries. The initial
amount earmarked for this Fund will be Rs.200 crore. The financial assistance,
which would be directly provided by SIDBI to eligible small-scale units, can take
the form of either loans or equity.
17.
A National Equity Fund Scheme was established in 1987, to provide
equity assistance to tiny small scale units with projects of less than Rs.10 lakhs
and located in places with a population not exceeding 5 lakhs (15 lakhs in the case
of Hill Areas and the North Eastern Region). I propose to extend the National
Equity Fund Scheme to all tiny small-scale units irrespective of their location,
except for units in metropolitan areas. Furthermore, the scope of this scheme will
be enlarged to cover expansion, modernization, technology upgradation and
diversification. The scheme, which is managed by SIDBI, will continue to be funded
by the Central Government and SIDBI on 50:50 basis.
18.
Adequate availability of credit from the banking system is critical for
the small scale sector. The Government, in consultation with banks, has formulated
a Seven Point Action Plan for improving the flow of credit to this sector. A key
feature of the Plan is the setting up of specialized bank branches to serve the needs
of small scale units in 85 identified districts, each with more than 2,000 registered
small scale units. The public sector banks will ensure that 100 such dedicated
branches are operational before the end of 1995-96.
19.
The North Eastern region of our country merits special attention. With
a view to accelerating industrial development, a new North Eastern Development
Bank (NEDB) is being established to finance creation, expansion and modernization
of industrial enterprises and infrastructure projects in the region. The Bank will be
located within the region. It will have an authorized capital of Rs.500 crore. Initial
contributions to capital will be provided by All India Financial Institutions such as
IDBI, ICICI and UTI, providing scope for contribution from other investors
subsequently.

7

20.
In addition to these measures for enhancing income earning
opportunities for the weaker sections of our society, I am pleased to announce four
far-reaching programmes for the general welfare of the poor, especially in rural
areas. The first programme addresses the serious deficiency in housing facilities
for the rural poor. As Honourable Members are aware, there is a major ongoing
rural housing programme, the Indira Awas Yojana. About 4 lakh dwelling units are
expected to be provided on a subsidized basis in 1994-95 to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and freed bonded labourers. For 1995-96, the housing target is
being more than doubled to 10 lakh units. With this initiative, we will be able to
build 50 lakh rural dwelling units in the next five years. This will go a long way
towards solving the critical shortage for basic shelter among rural poor.
21.
The greatest hardships among the poor are often suffered by the old
and the weak, most of whom are unemployable. To soften the hardship in their
twilight years, a National Social Assistance Scheme has been proposed to cover the
poor and needy. One component of the scheme is the provision of a national
minimum old age pension of Rs.75 per month to people above 65 years of age who
are below the poverty line. A second component provides lump-sum survivor benefits
to poor households, on the death of the primary bread earner, of Rs.5000. The
third component aims at provision of sustenance for pre-natal and post-natal
maternity care to women belonging to poor households for the first two births. The
scheme will eventually cover about 14 million neediest beneficiaries from households
below the poverty line. Three quarters of the beneficiaries are likely to be women
needing assistance on account of old age, widowhood and maternity. The Scheme,
to be funded jointly by the Centre and the States, will be implemented by the
States through Panchayati Raj institutions. For this purpose, I am appointing a
Committee to work out the details of this Scheme.
22.
The social assistance package will be complemented by a new Group
Life Insurance Scheme of the LIC which will be implemented by Panchayats in
rural areas. Under this scheme, life cover of Rs.5000 will be provided for a modest
annual premium of around Rs.70. For poor households, the Central Government
will subsidise 25 per cent of the premium with the State Government meeting an
equal amount and the beneficiary contributing 50 per cent. The subsidy will be
limited to one policy per poor household. For the others, there will be no subsidy
on the premium. The object of the scheme is a massive promotion of social insurance
and thrift in rural areas with the active involvement of Panchayats. For poor
households, it will provide a second tier of partly subsidised security supplementing
the survivor benefit and will also inculcate the habit of saving. The LIC will be
working out the details of the scheme.
23.
Schemes to provide mid-day meals for school children have a beneficial
impact not only on child nutrition but also on school attendance. Some of the State
Governments have been operating school mid-day meals schemes. As part of the
emphasis being laid by this Government on the primary education, and taking into
account the comfortable food stocks with the public sector agencies, it is appropriate
that the Central Government should be willing to participate in phased expansion
of these schemes. The modality of implementing this, with necessary local variations,
will be worked out by a Committee to make it operational in 1995-96.
24.
Taken as a whole, these new initiatives for funding agricultural
infrastructure, promoting handlooms and khadi and village industries, expanding
rural housing and introducing social insurance will greatly strengthen the anti-

8

poverty component of our strategy. In parallel, we will also continue with the
economic reforms, which have already yielded excellent results.
25.
The industrial, trade and tax reforms, which have created demonstrable
buoyancy in industrial production, investment and exports, will be continued, with
a special effort to improve implementation at the ground level. An important positive
development is the upsurge of investment proposals in infrastructure sectors, such
as power and telecommunications. We will ensure that the flow of investment into
these critical sectors is expedited. Reforms in the capital markets are being pursued
vigorously. Major amendments have been made recently in the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Act to give SEBI powers for effective regulation of
the capital markets. We propose to introduce legislation to set up Central Depositories
later this year. We will continue our efforts at financial sector reforms.
26.
In my speech last year, I had drawn attention to the report of the
Committee on Reforms in the Insurance Sector and indicated that we would evolve
a broad consensus on the future direction of reform. As a first step, I propose to
establish an independent Regulatory Authority for the Insurance industry. Necessary
legislation will be introduced shortly.
27.

I shall now briefly go over the Revised Estimates for 1994-95.

28.
The Budget Estimates for 1994-95 had placed the total expenditure at
Rs.1,51,699 crore. This is now expected to go up to Rs.1,62,272 crore, an increase
of Rs.10,573 crore.
29.
Budget Estimates for the current year provided Rs.46,582 crore as
budget support for Plan expenditure. This is being enhanced to Rs.48,761 crore to
accommodate additional assistance to the State Plans and additional allocations
for the MPs Local Area Scheme.
30.
Non-Plan expenditure in the current year is placed at Rs.1,13,511
crore which represents an increase of Rs.8,394 crore over the Budget Estimates.
Additional provision has had to be made in the Revised Estimates towards food and
fertilizer subsidies. The provision for food subsidy has to be substantially increased
by Rs.1,100 crore because of the time lag in the revision of issue prices of foodgrains.
Fertilizer subsidy is being increased by Rs.1,166 crore from the budgeted level to
cover the requirement of imports and to clear past arrears. There has been an
unprecedented rise in collections from small savings schemes this year.
Consequently, an additional amount of Rs.4,497 crore is being provided in the
Revised Estimates as loans to States and Union Territories.
31.
Gross tax revenues were estimated at Rs.87,136 crore in the Budget
Estimates. I am happy to report that our tax reforms are beginning to have the
expected impact and gross tax revenues are Rs.2,695 crore higher than the Budget
Estimates, reaching a figure of Rs.89,831 crore in the Revised Estimates for 199495. This is a vindication of our strategy of tax reform, and also a tribute to the hard
work and dedication of the revenue department, without whose unstinting efforts
this result could not have been achieved.
32.
External loans, net of repayment, are placed at Rs.3,947 crore compared
to the Budget Estimates of Rs.4,279 crore.

9

33.
Though tax collections and other non-debt receipts have been higher
than budgeted, the gains have been outweighed by much larger increases in plan
and non-plan expenditure. The fiscal deficit was originally budgeted at Rs.54,915
crore or 6 per cent of GDP. The fiscal deficit in the Revised Estimates comes to
Rs.61,035 crore which is about 6.7 per cent of GDP. However, nearly three quarters
of this deterioration is due to the extraordinary rise in small saving collections, 75
per cent of which are passed on to the States. Thus the bulk of the deterioration in
the fiscal deficit is not on account of increased expenditure of the Central
Government, but only a reflection of larger small savings as compared to the Budget
Estimates, which are on lent to the States. If this element is excluded, the Centre’s
fiscal deficit would be only 6. 2 per cent of GDP compared to the Budget target of
6 per cent.
34.
The Tenth Finance Commission (TFC) submitted its Report covering
the five year period of 1995-2000, on November 26, 1994. The Report recommends
a substantial increase in transfers to the States. Despite the severe constraint on
the Centre’s resources, the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Commission and these are being implemented with effect from 1995-96. The flow
of funds based on Finance Commission devolution and transfers will increase by
about 22 per cent, from Rs.28,832 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.35,055 crore in 1995-96.
We expect the States to use the additional resources for the purposes for which
they are released and ensure that the fruits of the schemes reach the intended
beneficiaries.
35.
I now turn to the Budget Estimates for 1995-96. The total expenditure
is estimated at Rs.1,72,151 crore. The total budgetary support from the Central
Government’s budget to the Central and the State Plans is being placed at Rs.48,500
crore in 1995-96, which represents an increase of Rs.1,918 crore over the level in
Budget Estimates 1994-95.
36.
The total outlay of the Central Plan 1995-96 has been increased to
Rs.78,849 crore from Rs.70,141 crore in the Budget Estimates 1994-95. The
budgetary support for the Central Plan 1995-96 has been increased to Rs.28,994
crore from Rs.27,278 crore in the Budget Estimates 1994-95. The balance will be
met by the internal and extra budgetary resources of the Central Public Sector
Enterprises to the extent of 63 per cent, as against 61 per cent in Budget Estimates
1994-95.
37.
I am providing Rs.19,506 crore as Central Plan assistance to States
and Union Territories in the Budget Estimates 1995-96 compared to Rs.19,304
crore in Budget Estimates 1994-95. It is relevant to note that the plan transfer to
States and UTs for 1994-95 include Rs.2,680 crore as part of the Ninth Finance
Commission decisions. Tenth Finance Commission has not suggested any transfer
on Plan Account. Thus the discretionary plan transfer by the Centre to States and
UT goes up from Rs.16,624 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.19,506 crore in 1995-96, yielding
an increase of over 17%. This amount has to be viewed in the background of
substantial increase in transfers to the States as a result of the recommendations
of the Tenth Finance Commission.
38.
In line with our strategy of giving priority to programmes which directly
benefit the poor, budgetary support to the Central Plan is being concentrated on
Rural Development, Employment and Poverty-alleviation programmes and human
resource development sectors. As Honourable Members are aware, the directly
targeted Rural Development programmes for eradicating rural poverty have received

10

special emphasis and enhanced outlays during the reform process. In the last
budget, the outlay for the Department of Rural Development was raised to Rs.7,010
crore, more than double the amount of Rs.3,100 crore budgeted two years earlier
in 1992-93. For 1995-96, this allocation is being further increased to Rs. 7,700
crore. With this, we will be well on the way to meeting the Eighth Five Year Plan
target of Rs.30,000 crore of Central Plan outlay for Rural Development. It is estimated
that the Rural Employment programmes under the Department of Rural Development
generated about 800 million mandays of employment in 1991-92. In 1995-96,
these programmes are estimated to generate 1290 million mandays of employment.
39.
The Annual Plan of 1995-96 will continue to lay stress on improving
productivity in the agricultural sector and diversifying the pattern of agriculture
into higher value generating farm schemes like horticulture. Revitalising the
cooperatives for providing credit inputs and extension support, marketing and
processing would be another thrust area. The flow of agricultural credit through
cooperatives is projected at Rs.14,000 crore in 1995-96, as compared to an estimate
of about Rs.12,000 crore in 1994-95. Assistance will be given to 220 cooperative
societies for women and 330 cooperative societies for weaker sections. It is expected
that over 38,000 hectares would be brought under drip irrigation. Integrated pest
management, which is eco-friendly, will be extended and 1500 training-cumdemonstrations will be organised to train over 50,000 farmers. 40,000 hectares are
expected to be covered under intensive fish farming.
40.
The spread of educational opportunities is essential for social and
economic development. Despite severe budgetary constraints, the Plan Outlay for
Education in 1995-96 is being increased from Rs.1,541 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.1,825
crore in 1995-96. Elementary Education is particularly important, especially for
improving the position of girls and women in our society. The outlay for Elementary
Education is being increased substantially by 24.5 per cent to Rs.651 crore. Under
Operation Black Board, primary schools with enrolment of more than 100 children
are being provided a third teacher. The allocation for Operation Black Board is
being increased by 30 per cent for 1995-96. The allocation for post-matric
scholarships for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been increased from
Rs.105 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.145 crore in 1995-96. This will help additional
coverage of deserving students. To assist the State Governments, Government of
India is passing on all the external assistance received for Primary Education as
grants to State Governments, irrespective of the terms on which the assistance is
received by the Central Government.
41.
The combined Plan Outlay for the Departments of Health and Family
Welfare is being increased to Rs.2,251 crore in 1995-96. The allocation for the
National Malaria Eradication Programme for 1995-96 is being increased by 32 per
cent to Rs.139 crore, so that coverage can be extended to 163 million people with
top priority being accorded to tribal areas and North Eastern States where the
problem of malaria has been endemic. Rs.80 crore is being allocated in 1995-96 for
the Leprosy Control Programme which aims to eliminate transmission of this disease
by the year 2000. An allocation of Rs.726 crore is proposed for Family Welfare
Services directly meant for rural areas, including Rs.160 crore for maintenance of
5435 Rural Family Welfare Centres and Rs.190 crore for the maintenance of 9577
Rural Sub-Centres.

11

42.
Total non-Plan expenditure in 1995-96 is estimated to be Rs.1,23,651
crore. The outlay for Defence has been increased to Rs.25,500 crore, keeping in
mind national security imperatives. An amount of Rs.5,400 crore is being earmarked
for fertiliser subsidy in 1995-96. In addition, Rs.500 crore has been earmarked for
cheaper supply of phosphatic and potassium fertilisers to farmers, thus raising the
total effective fertiliser subsidy to Rs.5,900 crore. Food subsidy receives an allocation
of Rs.5,250 crore.
43.
Turning to revenue receipts, gross tax revenues at the existing rates of
taxation, are estimated at Rs.1,03,762 crore. The payment of share of taxes to
States is placed at Rs.29,388 crore. The net revenue receipts to the Centre, including
non-tax revenues are estimated to increase from Rs.86,084 crore in 1994-95, to
Rs.1,00,787 crore in 1995-96.
44.
In the area of capital receipts, traditional market borrowings are put at
Rs.3,700 crore. Other medium and long term loans are estimated at Rs.19,000
crore and short term loans at Rs.4,387 crore. Net external assistance is estimated
at Rs.4,456 crore. As in previous years, the Government intends to continue the
process of disinvestment of the equity of public sector enterprises. The Budget
Estimates provide for receipts from disinvestment of Rs.7,000 crore, a significant
increase from the figure of Rs.5,237 crore in the Revised Estimates for 1994-95.
45.
Taking into account other changes in receipts and expenditure, total
receipts at existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.1,67,151 crore, while total
expenditure is estimated at Rs.1,72,151 crore. This results in a budget deficit of
Rs.5,000 crore. The fiscal deficit emerging from these estimates for 1995-96 will be
Rs.57,634 crore, which will be about 5.5 per cent of GDP. I would have liked to do
better, but on balance I feel that a fiscal deficit of this order can be absorbed, if the
existing growth momentum is maintained.
PART B
46.

I now turn to my tax proposals for 1995-96.

47.
Over the past three years, we have made a number of structural changes
in our tax laws covering both direct and indirect taxes. Unlike earlier isolated
attempts to modify the tax system, these changes were part of a medium term
programme of tax reform guided by certain general principles that have gained
wide acceptability. We wanted to build a structure which is simple, relies on moderate
tax rates but with a wider base and better enforcement, serves the objectives of
equity and provides the incentives and signals consistent with developing an
internationally competitive, dynamic economy.
48.
Direct taxation is the most equitable form of raising revenues, but our
experience in the earlier years of high tax rates showed that high rates did not lead
to high collections. I am happy to report that our decision to reduce rates and
thereby encourage compliance has yielded good results. Personal income and
corporation taxes, taken together, are expected to increase by more than 25 per
cent in 1994-95. The share of direct taxes in GDP has increased from 2.1 per cent
in 1990-91 to 2.8 per cent in 1994-95.
49.

In the area of customs duty our objective was to reduce the high rates

12

of import duty gradually, so as to lower costs of production and improve
competitiveness of user industries while allowing domestic producers facing
competition from imported goods reasonable time to adjust. The strong growth of
Indian industry in 1994-95, to which I have referred earlier, demonstrates
conclusively that customs duty reforms have succeeded in imparting the necessary
dynamism to industrial production.
50.
In the area of excise duties, our objectives were to simplify the structure,
broaden the base, reduce high rates of duty which encourage evasion, shift to ad
valorem rates as far as possible and extend the coverage of MODVAT. The results
are evident in the impressive growth of excise revenues in 1994-95.
51.
I am reassured by these results that our basic strategy of tax reforms
stands fully vindicated. Together with administrative steps being taken to improve
revenue collection, I am now confident that we can create a tax structure which
will ensure buoyant revenues while also stimulating growth of production and
employment.
52.
Mr. Speaker Sir, after this brief overview, I would like to present the
details of my proposals relating to direct taxes.
53.
I have received many representations from Members of Parliament,
trade unions and others requesting for increase in the exemption limit for personal
income-tax. Our Government has consistently responded to the genuine needs of
the common man. I, therefore, propose to further raise the exemption limit for
income tax from Rs 35,000 at present, to Rs. 40,000.
54.
We need to strengthen incentives for savings. At present, under section
80L of the Income-tax Act, income by way of interest and dividend from certain
specified financial assets is exempt from income tax to the extent of Rs.10,000 per
annum. In order to provide greater fillip to domestic savings by individuals and
HUFs, I propose to raise this limit to Rs.13,000. This will provide both relief and an
added incentive for savers.
55.
With these changes, a salaried individual will not pay any tax upto a
salary level of Rs.55,000. In the case of working women, this limit is even higher at
Rs. 58,000. In addition, such an individual would benefit from an additional
exemption of Rs.13,000 if he or she takes full advantage of the exemption for
income from savings instruments under section 80 L. The tax exempt income could
therefore reach a maximum of Rs 68,000 generally and Rs 71,000 for working
women. It is only beyond this level that such individuals will start paying tax and
that too only at modest rates.
56.
Inadequate infrastructure is a key constraint to our economic progress.
In order to promote expansion of quality infrastructure, I propose to allow a fiveyear tax holiday for any enterprise which builds, maintains and operates
infrastructure facilities in the area of highways, expressways and new bridges,
airports, ports and rapid mass transport systems. This tax holiday will be available
to enterprises which commence operation after 1st April,1995 . As an incentive to
financial institutions to provide long-term finance for development of such
infrastructure, I propose to allow a deduction of upto 40 per cent of their taxable
income derived from financing of these investments, provided this amount is credited
to a special reserve.

13

57.
Under section 80-IA of the Income-tax Act, new industrial undertakings,
hotels and shipping concerns commencing operation before 31st March,1995 are
entitled to a deduction of 30 per cent of their income if they are companies or 25
per cent of their income if they are non-corporate entities. This incentive is available
to co-operative societies for the first 12 years, and to others for the first 10 years
of operation. As a special measure of support to small scale industries, I propose
to extend this concession to them for five more years. Thus, new industrial
undertakings in the small scale sector which commence operation before 31st
March, 2000 will be eligible for this concession.
58.
Exports of software have grown rapidly and represent a potentially
dynamic segment of export earnings. Software exporters have, however, represented
that the deduction under section 80HHE available to them is extended from year to
year whereas section 80HHC for export of goods is open-ended. I propose to accede
to their request to place section 80HHE on the same basis as section 80HHC.
59.
Venture capital funds can be an important instrument for promoting
growth of new firms and technologies which often involve high risk. The tax laws of
many countries allow income of such funds to be exempt from taxation in the
hands of the fund but tax it, after distribution, in the hands of the shareholders.
In order to encourage the formation of venture capital funds on similar lines in
India, I propose to exempt from tax, income by way of dividend and long term
capital gains from equity investments made by approved venture capital funds or
venture capital companies. Such venture capital funds will be required to invest
only in unlisted companies engaged in manufacturing. Income will, however, be
fully taxable in the hands of the shareholders.
60.
On Independence Day, 1994, the Prime Minister had announced the
launching of the Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication Programme. Under this
programme, the Ministry of Urban Development is setting up a National Urban
Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF). I propose to allow 100% deduction from income
in respect of contributions made to this fund.
61.
Under section 80-U of the Income-tax Act, a separate deduction of
Rs.20,000 is allowed from the total income of handicapped persons. I have received
several representations from handicapped persons and welfare organisations stating
that these individuals need additional relief on account of increased cost of medicines
and living aids. Recognising their needs, I propose to raise the level of deduction for
handicapped persons from Rs.20,000 at present to Rs.40,000.
62.
Many voluntary relief organisations have represented that the parents
or guardians of children with severe disability, such as spastic children, face great
mental agony having to worry about the burden of providing for the maintenance
of the disabled after the death of the parents or the guardian. I see merit in this
representation. I, therefore, propose to allow a new deduction of upto Rs. 20,000,
from the taxable income of parents or guardians of handicapped children provided
this amount is deposited in any approved scheme of LIC, UTI etc. for providing
recurring or lump sum payment for the maintenance and upkeep of a handicapped
dependant after the death of parents or the guardian.
63.

A number of funds have been established by trade unions for the

14

welfare of the employees and their dependants. These funds are used to provide
cash benefits in the event of superannuation, illness or death or to meet the cost
of education of the employees’ children. I propose to exempt the income of such
funds from income tax.
64.
The National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation has been
set up in pursuance of the announcement made by the Prime Minister on
Independence Day, 1993. The main object of the Corporation is to promote economic
and developmental activities for the benefit of the members of the minority
communities. I propose to exempt from income tax the income of this corporation
as well as of similar corporations established by any State Government. I also
propose to allow deduction in respect of donations made to these corporations,
under section 80G of the Income-tax Act .
65.
Upgradation of human resources is a high priority. The fundamental
need is for improvement of primary and adult education in rural and semi-urban
areas where facilities for such education are deficient. In addition to public funding,
we have to encourage private contributions for this purpose. In 1993, I had extended
the benefit of 100% deduction from taxable income for donations to universities
and educational institutions of national eminence. This year, I propose to extend
100% deduction for donations to Zila Saksharta Samitis constituted in the districts
for the promotion of elementary education. This measure will help to mobilise
additional resources for elementary and adult education in rural and semi-urban
areas and enable us to intensify our total literacy campaign.
66.
All over the world, revenue administrations widen the tax base by
enlarging the scope of deduction of tax at source. This brings in more persons into
the tax net and assists the transition to lower rates of taxation. It also helps in the
reporting of correct incomes. In many countries, income from professional and
technical services is subject to deduction of tax at source. In order to prevent
under-reporting of income in this sector, I propose to introduce a new provision in
the Income-tax Act subjecting the sums payable by way of fees for professional or
technical services to the requirement of deduction of income-tax at source at the
rate of 10 per cent. There will be no deduction of tax at source where the aggregate
of payments or credits during the financial year is below Rs.20,000 or where
payments are made by individuals and HUFs.
67.
Tax is deducted at source on payments made in excess of Rs. 10,000,
to contractors under section 194C of the Income-tax Act. Legal disputes have arisen
whether the TDS provisions will apply to transport contracts, advertisement
contracts, broadcasting contracts, telecasting contracts and catering contracts. To
avoid further litigation and check tax avoidance, I propose to provide for deduction
of tax at source in these cases at the existing rate of 2 per cent for the main
contract and 1 per cent for sub-contracts. Taking into account the inflation over
the years, I also propose to raise the limit below which deduction at source is not
necessary from Rs.10,000 at present to Rs.20,000.
68.
The income from units of mutual funds or of the Unit Trust of India,
though liable to income-tax, is not subject to deduction of tax at source in most
cases. This has led to non-reporting or under-reporting of such income. In order to
prevent misuse and ensure a uniformity of treatment with other financial instruments

15

I propose to provide for deduction of tax at source from such incomes at the rate
of 20 per cent in the case of companies and at the rate of 15 per cent for all others
including individuals and HUFs. There will be no change in the present tax treatment
of non-residents or offshore funds. In the case of resident unit-holders, deduction
of tax at source will be made only if the aggregate amount of income payable under
each scheme during a financial year exceeds Rs.10,000. No deduction of tax at
source will be required where units have been issued under an existing scheme
which provides for payment of a fixed amount after a certain period of time or
where post-dated cheques have already been issued towards payment of income.
69.
I also propose to provide for deduction of income-tax at source from
interest on time deposits with banks at the rate of 20 per cent plus surcharge in
the case of domestic companies and 10 per cent in the case of individuals and
other non-corporate entities. The new provision will be applicable only to the deposits
made on or after 1st July, 1995. No tax shall be deducted if the amount of interest
credited or paid during a financial year is Rs.10,000 or less branch-wise. Thus,
persons having small deposits will not be affected by the requirement of deduction
of tax. The existing facility of non-deduction of tax, where the recipient of interest
has no taxable income will also be available. Interest on time deposits with primary
co-operative credit societies, co-operative land mortgage banks and co-operative
land development banks will be outside the scope of this provision.
70.
Chapter XX C of the Income-tax Act empowers the Central Government
to make pre-emptive purchase of immovable properties, beyond a prescribed limit,
which, at present, is Rs.10 lakhs. A single monetary limit for all the notified cities
needs to be revised in the context of local variations in real estate prices. I, therefore,
propose to make a provision for prescribing different monetary limits for different
cities.
71.
Hon’ble Members are aware that the searches conducted by the Income
Tax Department are an important means of unearthing black money. However,
undisclosed incomes have to be related to the different years in which the income
was earned and as such assessments are unduly delayed. In order to make the
procedure more effective, I am proposing a new scheme under which undisclosed
income detected as a result of search shall be assessed separately at a flat rate of
60 per cent. An appeal against the order can be filed directly before the Income-Tax
Appellate Tribunal.
72.
In allowing deduction for depreciation, 100 per cent deduction is allowed
in the year of purchase for individual items of machinery or plant the value of
which does not exceed Rs.5,000, The written down value of such assets is thereafter
taken as nil. This provision was introduced as difficulties were experienced in
keeping record of items of small value for purposes of allowance of depreciation.
After switching over to the concept of block of assets with effect from 1st April,
1988, all the items of plant and machinery falling in a block are pooled together for
allowing depreciation at the prescribed rates. There is, therefore, no justification
for the continuance of this provision. I, accordingly, propose to provide that even
items of machinery or plant costing less than Rs. 5,000 will form part of a ‘block
of assets’ and depreciation will be allowed on the same at the rate specified in the
Income-tax Rules.

16

73.
I propose to amend the provisions of the Income-tax Act to provide that
the taxable income may be computed only on cash or mercantile basis. It is also
being provided that the taxpayers shall follow accounting standards as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time for various businesses. This
provision is being made applicable from accounting year starting from 1st April,1996.
74.
The calculation of capital gains on sale of bonus shares has led to
several disputes. In order to simplify the position and avoid disputes, I propose
that the cost of bonus shares for calculating the capital gains tax shall be taken at
nil.
75.

I now turn to my proposals regarding indirect taxes.

76.
The thrust of my proposals is to continue the strategy of tax reform we
have followed and reduce the cost of inputs to Indian producers, simplify the tax
structure, minimize anomalies, promote competition and efficiency, lower prices
paid by Indian consumers and thereby check the potential for inflation.
77.
I shall deal first with import duties. The present peak rate of import
duty of 65% is still very high compared to other developing countries, let alone
industrialised nations. I propose to continue the process of phased reduction in the
peak rate by lowering it to 50%.
78.
The machinery and capital goods sector is a critical sector of our industry
and it has responded extremely well to the new policies with a growth of 25% in
April-November, 1994. I propose a package of measures which will further rationalise
and simplify the import duty structure as applicable to machinery and capital
goods, remove a number of anomalies and assist the industry in achieving a high
rate of growth.
·

At present the general import duty rate on machinery items is 25% but
certain capital goods like generating sets and weighing machinery attract
higher rate of duty. I am proposing to bring down the duty on these items
also to 25%.

·

The rate of import duty on machine tools, currently varies between 35%
and 45%. I propose to unify the duty rates at 25% which is the general
rate for machinery. Parts of such machine tools will also generally attract
duty of 25%.

·

Components of capital goods generally attract an import duty of 25% but
components which contain electronic parts and components which are
interchangeable with motor vehicle parts, attract higher rates. I propose
to reduce the duty rate on these components to 25%.

·

Quality control is a must for manufacturing industries if they have to
improve the quality of their products. I am proposing to reduce the import
duty on testing, quality control and other instruments from present rates
varying from 40% to 60% to a uniform level of 25%. Parts of such
instruments in general will also attract the same rate.

79.
These proposals will unify the customs duty rates for nearly 80% of
general machinery (both mechanical and electrical), machine tools, instruments

17

and projects at 25%. They will avoid anomalies relating to parts and components,
reduce classification disputes and promote investment by reducing its cost.
80.
Metals, ferrous and non-ferrous, are key inputs into capital goods and
many other lines of production, many of which are undertaken by small scale
producers. These items at present attract rates of duty varying from 50% to 60%.
Ideally, such materials should not attract rates of duty higher than those on the
capital goods. But keeping in view the need to allow domestic producers of metals
a reasonable transition period, I am proposing to reduce the import duty rates on
ferrous and non-ferrous metals to 40%. For unwrought non-ferrous metals like
copper, zinc and lead, the import duty is proposed to be reduced to 35%. Import
duty on hot rolled coils of iron and steel for re-rolling is proposed to be reduced
from 40% to 30%, and that on stainless steel scrap from 30% to 20%. Import duty
on sponge iron is proposed to be reduced from 30% to 20%. I also propose to
reduce the import duty on a number of non-metallic minerals from 65% to 30%.
81.
I am also simplifying the import duty structure on ball or roller bearings
which currently attract different rates of duty depending on size, weight and
description. Henceforth all ball or roller bearings will attract a uniform duty of 25%
+ Rs. 120/kg.The revised duty structure is likely to reduce the incentive for underinvoicing and smuggling.
82.
Clothing and textiles are items of mass consumption. Yet our import
duties on raw materials and inputs used to manufacture synthetic yarns, fibres
and fabrics are on the high side. In view of this, and keeping in mind the continuing
inflationary pressure in this sensitive area, I propose to reduce import duty on
xylenes from 30% to 10% to lower the cost of manufacturing DMT/PTA. I am also
proposing to reduce the import duty on DMT, PTA and MEG, being essential raw
materials for the manufacture of polyester fibre and polyester filament yarn, from
60% to 35%. On caprolactum, a basic raw material for nylon, the import duty is
proposed to be reduced from 60% to 45%. These changes should substantially
reduce input costs to the user industries. To help ensure that the benefits are
reflected in the prices of the final products, I also propose to reduce the import
duty on synthetic fibres and filament yarns to 45% ad valorem.
83.
I am also proposing to reduce the import duty on certain chemicals
widely used in industry. On basic feed stocks like ethylene and benzene, the import
duty is being reduced from 15% to 10%. On soda ash, caustic soda and linear alkyl
benzene, the import duty is being reduced from 65% to 40%. On certain chemical
intermediates like acrylonitrile, the import duty is being reduced from 30% to 20%.
I am proposing to reduce the import duty on molasses from 65% to 10% to help the
alcohol based chemical industries. The duty on LPG is also being reduced from
15% to 10%.
84.
Electronics is a fast growing industry offering great promise for exports,
employment and development in the small scale sector. In my last budget, I had
conducted a major restructuring of duties to promote growth of this industry. As a
further step in this direction, I propose to reduce the import duty on specified raw
materials and piece parts from the present levels of 20% and 30% to a uniform
level of 15%, on electronic components including printed circuit boards and colour
monitor tubes from 40% to 25%, on populated printed circuit boards from 50%

18

and 65% to 35% and on computers, from 65% to 40%. I am also proposing to
reduce the import duty on integrated circuits and hard disc drives to 25% which is
likely to reduce the grey market in these products. Import duty on picture tubes for
colour TVs is being reduced from 65% to 40%. To give a boost to the telecom optical
fibre cable industry, I propose to reduce the import duty on optical fibres from 40%
to 35%. I am also proposing to reduce the import duty on both systems and
application software to a uniform level of 10% only. With these changes in duty
structure, I expect this industry to show even more dynamism in future.
85.
For promoting healthcare, last year I had simplified the import duty
structure on medical equipment, exempted many types of life saving equipment
from payment of duty, and abolished the certification procedure for availing of the
exemption for charitable hospitals. In order to help manufacture and maintenance
of medical equipment, I am extending the benefit of full exemption from import
duty to all parts of exempted life saving and sight saving equipment . Some crucial
spare parts of other dutiable medical equipment such as populated PCB will attract
an import duty of 15%. I am also proposing to fully exempt linear accelerators,
which are vital for the treatment of cancer patients. There are also proposals for
reduction of import duty on a large number of drug intermediates from 50% to
40%.
86.
Our printing industry needs quality paper so as to establish a foothold
in the international field. With this in view, I am proposing to reduce the import
duty on paper from 65% to 40%.
87.
To promote exports of finished leather and make it more competitive,
I propose to abolish the export duty on finished leather.
88.
Agriculture is the lynchpin of our economy and employs two thirds of
our labour force. In order to help agriculture and allied sectors directly, I propose
reducing import duties on certain items. I am proposing to reduce the import duty
on grand parent poultry stock from 30% to 20%. On certain drugs used as feed mix
for poultry, the duty is being reduced from 65% to 15%. For the fishing industry,
I propose to reduce the import duty on certain vaccines, prawn feed mix and
preparations for prawn processing from 65% to 15%. Agriculture and allied sectors
will also be helped by the general reduction in import duties on general machinery
and components. I have, however, proposed an increase in import duty on malt
and starch from 10% to 30%, that on silk cocoon from 30% to 40% and on oleopine
resins from 10% to 20% in order to give necessary protection to these sectors.
89.
I propose to raise the free baggage allowance for passengers coming to
India from Rs. 4000 to Rs.6000. Beyond this limit, the duty rate now is 100%
which I propose to reduce to 80%. I hope this will provide welcome relief to our
people working abroad and to travellers in general. At present import of goods
through a courier attracts import duty at the rate of 100% upto Rs.10,000/-and
200% thereafter. There has been a long standing demand from industry that goods
imported through a courier should be charged at the relevant rate for the item
being imported. I am making a provision to this effect in the Finance Bill. Pending
passage of the Legislation, I am proposing that goods imported by a courier will
attract a duty of 80% without any value limit.

19

90.

I now turn to my proposals for excise duties.

91.
In my earlier budgets, I had exempted from excise duty a large number
of items of common consumption like processed food, dairy products, jam, jelly,
butter, cheese, tea and coffee. Many other items of mass consumption like cooking
oil, bicycles and their tyres, kerosene stoves, bread, spices and household utensils
are also exempt from excise duty. My proposals in this budget will further reduce
the burden of excise duties on articles which are widely consumed.
92.
A number of articles of mass use are made of plastics. Plastics are also
finding increasing use in agriculture and agro-processing. The present rate of duty
on this basic material is 30%. I propose to bring down the rate of duty on plastics
to 25%. On the dutiable articles made from plastics also, I propose to reduce the
excise duty to 25%. However, articles of plastics which are exempt at present will
continue to be so. These measures are being combined with a reduction in the
import duty on bulk plastics from rates varying between 45% and 65% to a uniform
rate of 40%.
93.
At present, we have a uniform excise duty of 15% on all metals except
aluminum. I now propose to reduce the excise duty on aluminum also from 20% to
15%.
94.
In order to remove areas of dispute in classification and to rationalise
the duty structure, I propose a uniform excise duty of 15% on parts of capital
goods as against present rates which vary from 10% to 25%. This will avoid disputes
as to whether a particular item should be considered as an article of metal or
component of a machinery.
95.
I am also proposing a concessional rate of excise duty of 10% on
glassware produced by the labour intensive mouth blown process as against the
present rate of 20%.
96.
Many Honourable Members of Parliament have suggested that there
are certain sectors of the industry which are both highly labour intensive and
belong to the unorganised sector and that they deserve complete exemption from
excise duty. Having regard to these requests, I propose to exempt the following
from excise duty:-

HDPE and polypropylene mono-filaments which are mainly used for making
fishing nets and mosquito nets;

-

metal containers made without the aid of power;

-

non-elastic narrow woven fabrics of cotton;

-

unbranded surgical bandages; and

-

tarpaulin cloth made without the aid of power.

97.
As part of the process of reducing higher end duty rates, I am proposing
to lower excise duty:-

on aerated water from 50% to 40%;

20

-

on air conditioning machinery from 60% to 40%;

-

on cosmetics from 50% to 40%;

-

on glazed tiles from 40% to 30%.

-

on perfumed antiseptic cream from 30% to 20%.

98.
I am also proposing reduction in excise duty in certain areas of general
consumption -

on polymer based paints from 30% to 20%;

-

on cocoa and cocoa preparations from 25% to 20%;

-

on malt based food preparations from 25% to 20%;

-

on asbestos fibres from 20% to 10%;

-

on asbestos cement articles from 30% to 25%.

-

on audio and video magnetic tapes from 30% to 20%;

-

on dry cell batteries from 25% to 20%;

-

on coated fabrics from 35% to 25%;

-

on ceramic laboratory ware from 30% to 20%.

-

on fireworks from 20% to 15%.

-

on parts of motor vehicles and two-wheelers from 20% to 15%.

-

on glass containers from 30% to 20%.

99.
I propose to reduce the excise duty on polyester filament yarn from
69% to 57.5%. The rate is still high but revenue constraints rule out any further
reduction for the present. The concurrent reduction in import duties, indicated
earlier, will help ensure that the benefit of excise duty reduction is passed on to
consumers.
100.
The textured polyester yarn industry has complained about the burden
of excise duty of 69% on the value addition in their industry. I am proposing
suitable adjustment in the tariff value of textured yarn so as to reduce the total
duty burden at the texturising stage from Rs. 10.35/kg to Rs.4.60/kg. On sewing
thread which currently attracts excise duty at rates varying from 23% to 69%, I am
proposing a uniform duty of 23%.
101.
I have some proposals which are in the nature of anti-evasion measures.
I am proposing an excise duty of 10% on wool tops so as to check evasion of excise
duty at the woollen yarn stage. As full Modvat credit will be available, the tax will
fall only on those who are evading excise duty at the yarn stage. I am also proposing
a minimum excise duty of Rs. 10 per kilo on waste and scrap of fibre and yarn so
as to discourage the tendency to clear good quality fibre and yarn in the guise of
waste. It is also being clarified that yarn made predominantly from synthetic waste
will attract the same rate of duty as yarn made from staple fibre.
102.
Insulated wires and cables attract a duty of 30%. As these have wide
household and industrial application, I am proposing to reduce the duty to 25%.

21

103.
There is a persistent demand from the plastic woven bags manufacturers
for extending Modvat to the users of such bags. I am now proposing that users of
such plastic bags as well as jute bags be allowed full credit of excise duty paid on
such bags. Cement industry is one of the major consumers of such bags. I am
simultaneously proposing a modest increase in excise duty on cement from Rs.330
to Rs.350/MT for integrated cement plants and Rs. 185 to Rs. 200/MT for mini
cement plants. For the mini cement plants using vertical shaft kilns, the daily
clearance limit is also being raised from 200 to 300 MT per day.
104.
Certain items of china and porcelain ware attract a duty of 30% which
is on the high side for a product which is increasingly of common use. With a view
to giving relief to the consumers, I am proposing to reduce the duty to 15%.
105.
Small scale units play a significant role in the economy of the country.
Currently, only units whose turnover of dutiable goods did not exceed Rs. 2 crore
in the preceding financial year are eligible for the concessional rates of excise duty
under the general small scale industry exemption scheme. I have received
representations that the present limit of Rs. 2 crore is too low and that it acts as
a disincentive to future growth. I am thus proposing to raise the eligibility limit for
availing of the SSI exemption scheme to Rs. 3 crore.
106.
There has been a perpetual problem with manufacturers of exempted
goods as they may have to pay excise duty on waste and scrap generated during
the process of manufacture. It does not seem very logical to bring these units
under the excise control only for the purpose of charging duty on such waste and
scrap. I am thus proposing to fully exempt waste and scrap which arise in the
manufacture of exempted goods. This should help a large number of units in the
small scale sector.
107.
I am also proposing abolition of the system of filing of classification
lists. From 1st May, 1995, the manufacturers need not file any classification list
before clearing goods from the factory.
108.
There have been requests from trade and industry for liberalisation
and simplification of Modvat scheme. With this end in view, I am proposing the
following relaxations in the Modvat Rules-

Allowing Modvat credit for specified quality control, testing, pollution control
and R&D equipment;

-

Utilisation of Modvat credit for payment of duty on any goods notified
under the Modvat scheme;

-

Allowing Modvat credit for furnace oil and low sulphur heavy stock used
for generation of power in a factory manufacturing excisable goods.

109.
I am also proposing to extend Modvat for tyre yarn used in tyres by
imposing a duty of 20% on the intermediate tyre cord fabrics. To make up for the
revenue loss, the specific rates of duty on tyres are being raised by about 8%.
Excise duty on tyres for two wheeled and three wheeled vehicles is, however, not
being raised.
110.
I am proposing extension of Modvat scheme to industrial fabrics. In
the case of woollen fabrics also, I am proposing to extend Modvat fully, as such
fabrics already attract basic excise duty and enjoy limited Modvat facilities.

22

111.
I am also proposing to broadly align the Central Excise Tariff on textiles
on the lines of the harmonised system of nomenclature. This will help reduce
classification disputes.
112.
Consonant with the increase in prices, I am proposing an increase in
the existing specific rates of duty on cigarettes by about 7%.
113.
I have also proposed certain amendments in the Finance Bill seeking
to effect changes in the Customs Act, the Central Excises and Salt Act and excise
and customs tariffs. These include certain consequential amendments to the customs
tariff based on the amendments to the Harmonised Commodity Description and
Coding System which has been adopted by our country in terms of International
Convention on the Harmonised System. The amendments are merely enabling
provisions and do not have significant revenue implications. In order to save the
time of the House, I do not propose to recount them.
114.
The increases in excise duties are expected to lead to a revenue gain of
Rs. 335 crore while the reliefs will amount to Rs. 646 crore in a full year. Of the
total net loss of Rs. 311 crore, the loss to the Centre will be Rs.203 crore and that
to the States Rs.108 crore. On the customs side, the proposals would result in a
revenue loss of Rs. 1179 crore. Applying conventional methods of estimation, the
proposed changes in direct taxes are expected to lead to a revenue loss of about
Rs.900 crore on account of Income tax, of which the loss to the States would be
about Rs.700 crore. Total net loss to the Centre would thus be Rs. 1582 crore.
115.
These methods do not take adequate account of the gains from
simplification, rationalisation and improved tax compliance. Last year, the net loss
from the revenue proposals on the basis of conventional estimates was placed at
more than Rs. 4000 crore. However, I had predicted that because of gains from
compliance and better administration our revenues would not suffer any loss. This
optimism has been fully justified by performance as indicated in the Revised
Estimates for 1994-95. The tax changes I have proposed in the budget are essentially
a continuation of the efforts made in the previous year and I am confident that the
gains from the reform will ensure that there will be no revenue loss. I am not,
therefore, assuming any revenue losses from my Budget proposals. Hence the
fiscal deficit will remain at 5.5% of GDP.
116.
Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and
excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
117.
Honourable members may recall that in my first Budget Speech, I had
affirmed that no power on earth could stop an idea whose time had come. I had
also stated that the emergence of India as a major economic power was such an
idea. It is this vision, of a resurgent India, taking her rightful place as an economic
power house in Asia, which has inspired our economic policies. Our Government
has worked hard to convert this vision into a reality, and I think the House will
agree with me that our efforts have met with considerable success. We have sought
to mobilise the collective will of our people for development through an action
programme which commits us to the twin pursuit of excellence and social justice.
There is no parallel example in the world of a country of India’s size and diversity
seeking to bring about a massive social and economic transformation in the
framework of a democratic polity and an open society committed to the rule of law
and individual freedom. India’s experience is, therefore, of great worldwide

23

significance. The world is certainly watching us with interest and expectation.
118.
As I see it, India is on the threshold of unprecedented opportunities
provided we have the wisdom to seize them. We have made a good beginning but
there is still a vast unfinished agenda. We have to persevere in our efforts. This will
call for hard work and dedication and a measure of self-discipline on the part of all
sections of society. We must never forget that a higher standard of living for our
people can become a reality only through an all round increase in productivity.
Clearly there are no short cuts to it. We cannot simply spend our way into prosperity.
Those of us in politics have a special responsibility. The pursuit of competitive
politics must not be allowed to distract our people’s attention from the basic task
of nation building. Politics in this country must recapture the spirit of idealism and
self sacrifice, which inspired our freedom struggle, and become a purposeful
instrument of social change. This then is no time for rest or to fritter away our
energies in partisan strife. It is a time for rededication and reaffirmation of our
collective solemn resolve to work tirelessly for building a new India worthy of the
dreams of the founding fathers of our Republic, an India which will enable our
children and grand children to lead a life of dignity and self respect, to take pride
in being Indian and to grapple effectively with the challenges of the twenty-first
century.
119.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words I commend this Budget to this
august House.
[15th March, 1995]

