Budget 2018-2019
Speech of

Arun Jaitley
Minister of Finance
February 1, 2018

Section I
Governance, Economy and Development
Madam Speaker,
1.

I rise to present the Budget for 2018-19.

2.
Madam, four years ago, we pledged to the people of India to give
this nation an honest, clean and transparent Government. We promised a
leadership capable of taking difficult decisions and restoring strong
performance of Indian economy. We promised to reduce poverty,
expedite infrastructure creation and build a strong, confident and a New
India. When our Government took over, India was considered a part of
fragile 5; a nation suffering from policy paralysis and corruption. We have
decisively reversed this. The Government, led by Prime Minister, Shri
Narendra Modi, has successfully implemented a series of fundamental
structural reforms. With the result, India stands out among the fastest
growing economies of the world.
3.
The journey of economic reforms during the past few years has been
challenging but rewarding. As a result of the reforms undertaken by the
Government, foreign direct investment has gone up. Measures taken by the
Government have made it much easier to do business in India. Natural
resources are now allocated in a transparent and honest manner. There is a
premium on honesty. There was a time when corruption was commonplace. Today, our people, especially our youths, are curious to lead their
lives honestly. The indirect tax system, with introduction of Goods and
Services Tax, has been made simpler. Benefits to the poor have been
targeted more effectively with use of digital technology.
The
demonetization of high value currency has reduced the quantum of cash
currency and circulation in India. It has increased the taxation base and
spurred greater digitization of the economy.
The Insolvency and

2
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) has changed the lender-debtor relationship. The
recapitalized banks will now have a greater ability to support growth. All
these structural reforms in the medium and long run will help Indian
economy achieve stronger growth for a long time.
4.
Indian economy has performed very well since our Government
took over in May, 2014. India achieved an average growth of 7.5% in first
three years of our Government. Indian economy is now 2.5 trillion dollar
economy – seventh largest in the world. India is expected to become the
fifth largest economy very soon. On Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) basis,
we are already the third largest economy.
5.
Indian society, polity and economy had shown remarkable
resilience in adjusting with the structural reforms. GDP growth at 6.3% in
the second quarter signaled turnaround of the economy. We hope to
grow at 7.2% to 7.5% in the second half. IMF, in its latest Update, has
forecast that India will grow at 7.4% next year. Manufacturing sector is
back on good growth path. The services, mainstay of our growth, have
also resumed their high growth rates of 8% plus. Our exports are expected
to grow at 15% in 2017-18. We are now firmly on course to achieve high
growth of 8% plus.
6.
We have taken up programmes to direct the benefits of structural
changes and good growth to reach farmers, poor and other vulnerable
sections of our society and to uplift the under-developed regions. This
year’s Budget will consolidate these gains and particularly focus on
strengthening agriculture and rural economy, provision of good health
care to economically less privileged, taking care of senior citizens,
infrastructure creation and working with the States to provide more
resources for improving the quality of education in the country.
7.
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has always stressed importance
of good governance. He has articulated the vision of ‘‘Minimum
Government and Maximum Governance’’. This vision has inspired
Government agencies in carrying out hundreds of reforms in policies, rules
and procedures. This transformation is reflected in improvement of India’s
ranking by 42 places in last three years in the World Bank’s ‘Ease of Doing
Business’ with India breaking into top 100 for the first time. I would like
to congratulate all those who worked to achieve this.
8.
Now, our Government has taken Ease of Doing business further by
stress on 'Ease of Living' for the common men of this country, especially for
those belonging to poor & middle class of the society. Good governance

3
also aims at minimum interference by the government in the life of
common people of the country.
9.
Government is providing free LPG connections to the poor of this
country through Ujjwala Yojana. Under Saubhagya Yojna 4 crore household
are being provided with electricity connections. More than 800 medicines
are being sold at lower price through more than 3 thousand Jan Aushadhi
Centres. Cost of stents have been controlled. Special scheme for free
dialysis of poor have been initiated. Persons belonging to poor and middle
class are also being provided a great relief in interest rates on housing
schemes. Efforts are being made to provide all government services,
whether bus or train tickets or individual certificates on line. These include
passports which may be delivered at doorstep in two or three days or
Company registration in one day time and these facilities have benefited a
large section of our country. Certificate attestation is not mandatory,
interviews for appointment in Group C and Group D posts have been done
away with. These measures have saved time and money of lakhs of our
youth. Our Government by using modern technology is committed to
provide a relief to those who suffer because of rigid rules and regulations.
10.
Madam, while undertaking these reforms and programmes, we
have worked sincerely and without weighing the political costs. Our
Government has ensured that benefits reach eligible beneficiaries and are
delivered to them directly. Many services and benefits are being delivered
to the people at their doorsteps or in their accounts. It has reduced
corruption and cost of delivery and has eliminated middlemen in the
process. Direct Benefit Transfer mechanism of India is the biggest such
exercise in the world and is a global success story.

Section II
Investment, Expenditure and Policy Initiatives
Agriculture and Rural Economy
11.
My Government is committed for the welfare of farmers. For
decades, country’s agriculture policy and programme had remained
production centric. We have sought to effect a paradigm shift. Honourable
Prime Minister gave a clarion call to double farmers’ income by 2022
when India celebrates its 75th year of independence. Our emphasis is on
generating higher incomes for farmers. We consider agriculture as an
enterprise and want to help farmers produce more from the same land
parcel at lesser cost and simultaneously realize higher prices for their

4
produce. Our emphasis is also on generating productive and gainful onfarm and non-farm employment for the farmers and landless families.
12.
Madam Speaker, as a result of the hard work of our country's
farmers agriculture production in our country is at a record level. Doing the
year 2016-17 we achieved a record food grain production of around 275
million tonnes and around 300 million tonnes of fruits and vegetables.
13.
Madam Speaker, in our party's manifesto it has been stated that the
farmers should realize at least 50 per cent more than the cost of their
produce, in other words, one and a half times of the cost of their
production. Government have been very much sensitive to this resolutions
and it has declared Minimum support price (MSP) for the majority of rabi
crops at least at one and a half times the cost involved. Now, we have
decided to implement this resolution as a principle for the rest of crops. I
am pleased to announce that as per pre-determined principle, Government
has decided to keep MSP for the all unannounced crops of kharif at least at
one and half times of their production cost. I am confident that this historic
decision will prove an important step towards doubling the income of our
farmers.
14.
Our Government works with the holistic approach of solving any
issue rather than in fragments. Increasing MSP is not adequate and it is
more important that farmers should get full benefit of the announced MSP.
For this, it is essential that if price of the agriculture produce market is less
than MSP, then in that case Government should purchase either at MSP or
work in a manner to provide MSP for the farmers through some other
mechanism. Niti Ayog, in consultation with Central and State Governments,
will put in place a fool-proof mechanism so that farmers will get adequate
price for their produce.
15.
For better price realization, farmers need to make decisions based
on prices likely to be available after its harvest. Government will create an
institutional mechanism, with participation of all concerned Ministries, to
develop appropriate policies and practices for price and demand forecast,
use of futures and options market, expansion of warehouse depository
system and to take decisions about specific exports and imports related
measures.
16.
Madam Speaker, last year, I had announced strengthening of
e-NAM and to expand coverage of e-NAM to 585 APMCs. 470 APMCs have
been connected to e-NAM network and rest will be connected by March,
2018.

5
17.
More than 86% of our farmers are small and marginal. They are
not always in a position to directly transact at APMCs and other wholesale
markets. We will develop and upgrade existing 22,000 rural haats into
Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs). In these GrAMs, physical
infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA and other
Government Schemes. These GrAMs, electronically linked to e-NAM and
exempted from regulations of APMCs, will provide farmers facility to make
direct sale to consumers and bulk purchasers.
18.
An Agri-Market Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of `2000 crore
will be set up for developing and upgrading agricultural marketing
infrastructure in the 22000 Grameen Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) and 585
APMCs.
19.
Task of connecting all eligible habitations with an all-weather road
has been substantially completed, with the target date brought forward to
March, 2019 from March 2022. It is now time to strengthen and widen its
ambit further to include major link routes which connect habitations to
agricultural and rural markets (GrAMs), higher secondary schools and
hospitals. Prime Minister Gram Sadak Yojana Phase III will include such
linkages.
20.
For several years, we have been stating that India is primarily an
agriculture based country. As India is primarily an agriculture based country,
our districts can specialize in some or other agricultural produce and be
known for it. But special attention is lacking in this regard. There is a need
to develop cluster based model in a scientific manner for identified
agriculture produces in our districts in the same manner as we have
developed model for industrial sector.
21.
Cultivation of horticulture crops in clusters bring advantages of
scales of operations and can spur establishment of entire chain from
production to marketing, besides giving recognition to the districts for
specific crops. The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare will reorient
its ongoing Schemes and promote cluster based development of agricommodities and regions in partnership with the Ministries of Food
Processing, Commerce and other allied Ministries.
22.
Our Government has promoted organic farming in a big way.
Organic farming by Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Village
Producers’ Organizations (VPOs) in large clusters, preferably of 1000
hectares each, will be encouraged. Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) will

6
also be encouraged to take up organic agriculture in clusters under
National Rural Livelihood Programme.
23.
Our ecology supports cultivation of highly specialized medicinal and
aromatic plants. India is also home to a large number of small and cottage
industries that manufacture perfumes, essential oils and other associated
products. Our Government shall support organized cultivation and
associated industry. I propose to allocate a sum of `200 crore for this
purpose.
24.
Food Processing sector is growing at an average rate of 8% per
annum. Prime Minister Krishi Sampada Yojana is our flagship programme
for boosting investment in food processing. Allocation of Ministry of Food
Processing
is
being
doubled
from
`715
crore
in
RE 2017-18 to `1400 crore in BE 2018-19. Government will promote
establishment of specialized agro-processing financial institutions in this
sector.
25.
Tomato, onion and potato are basic vegetables consumed
throughout the year. However, seasonal and regional production of these
perishable commodities pose a challenge in connecting farmers and
consumers in a manner that satisfies both. My Government proposes to
launch an ‘‘Operation Greens’’ on the lines of ‘‘Operation Flood’’.
‘‘Operation Greens’’ shall promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs),
agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional management. I propose
to allocate a sum of `500 crore for this purpose.
26.
India’s agri-exports potential is as high as US $ 100 billion against
current exports of US $ 30 billion. To realize this potential, export of agricommodities will be liberalized. I also propose to set up state-of-the-art
testing facilities in all the forty two Mega Food Parks.
27.
I propose to extend the facility of Kisan Credit Cards to fisheries and
animal husbandry farmers to help them meet their working capital needs.
Small and marginal farmers will get more benefits.
28.
Bamboo is ‘Green Gold’. We removed bamboo grown outside
forest areas from the definition of trees. Now, I propose to launch a Restructured National Bamboo Mission with an outlay of `1290 crore to
promote bamboo sector in a holistic manner.
29.
Many farmers are installing solar water pumps to irrigate their
fields. Generation of solar electricity is harvesting of Sun by the farmers

7
using their lands. Government of India will take necessary measures and
encourage State Governments to put in place a mechanism that their
surplus solar power is purchased by the distribution companies or
licencees at reasonably remunerative rates.
30.
Our Government set up a Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) in
NABARD for meeting funding requirement of irrigation works. Scope of the
Fund would be expanded to cover specified command area development
projects.
31.
Last year, I had announced setting up of Micro Irrigation Fund
(MIF) for facilitating expansion of coverage under micro irrigation and
Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DPIDF) to help finance
investment in dairying infrastructure. It is now time to expand such
focused investment Funds. I, now, announce setting up a Fisheries and
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FAIDF) for fisheries sector
and an Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF) for
financing infrastructure requirement of animal husbandry sector. Total
Corpus of these two new Funds would be `10,000 crore.
32.
Our Government has been steadily increasing the volume of
institutional credit for agriculture sector from year-to-year from `8.5 lakh
crore in 2014-15 to `10 lakh crore in 2017-18. I now propose to raise this
to `11 lakh crore for the year 2018-19.
33.
Presently, lessee cultivators are not able to avail crop loans.
Consequently, a significant proportion of arable land remains fallow and
tenant cultivators are forced to secure credit from usurious money
lenders. NITI Aayog, in consultation with State Governments, will evolve a
suitable mechanism to enable access of lessee cultivators to credit without
compromising the rights of the land owners.
34.
Government will extend a favourable taxation treatment to Farmer
Producers Organisations (FPOs) for helping farmers aggregate their needs
of inputs, farm services, processing and sale operations.
I shall give details in Part B of my speech.
35.
Air pollution in the Delhi-NCR region has been a cause of concern.
A special Scheme will be implemented to support the efforts of the
governments of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and the NCT of Delhi to
address air pollution and to subsidize machinery required for in-situ
management of crop residue.

8
36.
Madam Speaker, the present top leadership of this country has
reached at this level after seeing poverty at close quarters. Our leadership is
familiar with the problems being faced by the SC, ST, Backward Classes and
economically weaker sections of the society. People belonging to poor and
middle class are not case studies for them, on the other hand they
themselves are case study.
37.
The Lower and Middle Class have been the focus of our Government
during the last three years. This Government is continuously striving to
alleviate all the small and major problems of the poor.
38.
We launched Prime Minister’s Ujjwala Scheme to make poor women
free from the smoke of wood. Initially our target was to provide free LPG
connections to about 5 crore poor women. But in view of the pace of
implementation of Ujjwala scheme and its popularity among the women,
we propose to increase the target of providing free connection to 8 crore
poor women.
39.
Our Government has launched Prime Minister Saubhagya Yojana for
providing electricity to all households of the country. Under this scheme,
four crores poor households are being provided with electricity connection
free of charge. We are spending `16000 crore under this scheme. You can
very well imagine our anxiety and restlessness even with one hour power
cut. Think about those women and children whose houses will not get
electricity. Their life is going to change because of Pradhan Mantri
Saubhagya Yojana.
40.
Swachh Bharat Mission has benefited the poor. Under this mission,
Government has already constructed more than 6 crore toilets. The positive
effect of these toilets is being seen on the dignity of ladies, education of
girls and the overall health of family. Government is planning to construct
around 2 crore toilets.
41.
Madam Speaker, a roof for his family is another concern of the poor.
Far from the Benami properties earned by corruption, the poor only desire
to have a roof, a small house by his earning of honesty. Our Govt. is helping
them so that they may fulfil the dream of their own house. We have fixed a
target that every poor of this country may have his own house by 2022. For
this purpose Prime Minister Awas Yojana has been launched in rural and
urban areas of the country. Under Prime Minister Awas Scheme Rural, 51
lakhs houses in year 2017-18 and 51 lakh houses during 2018-19 which is
more than one crore houses will be constructed exclusively in rural areas. In
urban areas the assistance has been sanctioned to construct 37 lakh houses.

9
42.
My Government will also establish a dedicated Affordable Housing
Fund (AHF) in National Housing Bank, funded from priority sector lending
shortfall and fully serviced bonds authorized by the Government of India.
43.
Loans to Self Help Groups of women increased to about Rupees
42,500 crore in 2016-17, growing 37% over previous year. The
Government is confident that loans to SHGs will increase to `75,000 crore
by March, 2019. I propose to substantially increase allocation of National
Rural Livelihood Mission to `5750 crore in 2018-19.
44.
Ground water irrigation scheme under Prime Minister Krishi Sinchai
Yojna- Har Khet ko Pani will be taken up in 96 deprived irrigation districts
where less than 30% of the land holdings gets assured irrigation presently.
I have allocated `2600 crore for this purpose.
45.
As my proposals outlined indicate, focus of the Government next
year will be on providing maximum livelihood opportunities in the rural
areas by spending more on livelihood, agriculture and allied activities and
construction of rural infrastructure. In the year 2018-19, for creation of
livelihood and infrastructure in rural areas, total amount to be spent by
the Ministries will be `14.34 lakh crore, including extra-budgetary and nonbudgetary resources of `11.98 lakh crore. Apart from employment due to
farming activities and self employment, this expenditure will create
employment of 321 crore person days, 3.17 lakh kilometers of rural roads,
51 lakh new rural houses, 1.88 crore toilets, and provide 1.75 crore new
household electric connections besides boosting agricultural growth.
Details are in Annexure I.

Health, Education and Social Protection
46.
My Government’s goal is to assist and provide opportunity to every
Indian to realize her full potential capable of achieving her economic and
social dreams. Our Government is implementing a comprehensive social
security and protection programme to reach every household of old,
widows, orphaned children, divyaang and deprived as per the SocioEconomic Caste Census. Allocation on National Social Assistance
Programme this year has been kept at `9975 crore.
47.
We have managed to get children to School but the quality of
education is still a cause of serious concern. We have now defined
learning outcomes and National Survey of more than 20 lakh children has
been conducted to assess the status on the ground. This will help in

10
devising a district-wise strategy for improving quality of education. We
now propose to treat education holistically without segmentation from
pre-nursery to Class 12.
48.
Improvement in quality of teachers can improve the quality of
education in the country. We will initiate an integrated B.Ed. programme
for teachers. Training of teachers during service is extremely critical. We
have amended the Right to Education Act to enable more than 13 lakh
untrained teachers to get trained.
49.
Technology will be the biggest driver in improving the quality of
education. We propose to increase the digital intensity in education and
move gradually from ‘‘black board’’ to ‘‘digital board’’. Technology will also
be used to upgrade the skills of teachers through the recently launched
digital portal ‘‘DIKSHA’’.
50.
The Government is committed to provide the best quality
education to the tribal children in their own environment. To realise this
mission, it has been decided that by the year 2022, every block with more
than 50% ST population and at least 20,000 tribal persons, will have an
Ekalavya Model Residential School. Ekalavya schools will be on par with
Navodaya Vidyalayas and will have special facilities for preserving local art
and culture besides providing training in sports and skill development.
51.
To step up investments in research and related infrastructure in
premier educational institutions, including health institutions, I propose to
launch a major initiative named ‘‘Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in
Education (RISE) by 2022’’ with a total investment of `1,00,000 crore in
next four years. Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) would be
suitably structured for funding this initiative.
52.
Our Government has taken major initiative of setting up Institutes
of Eminence. There has been tremendous response to this initiative by
institutions both in public and private sectors. We have received more
than 100 applications. We have also taken steps to set up a specialized
Railways University at Vadodara.
53.
We propose to set up two new full-fledged Schools of Planning and
Architecture, to be selected on challenge mode. Additionally, 18 new SPAs
would be established in the IITs and NITs as autonomous Schools, also on
challenge mode.
54.
The Government would launch the ‘‘Prime Minister’s Research
Fellows (PMRF)’’ Scheme this year. Under this, we would identify 1,000

11
best B.Tech students each year from premier institutions and provide
them facilities to do Ph.D in IITs and IISc, with a handsome fellowship. It is
expected that these bright young fellows would voluntarily commit few
hours every week for teaching in higher educational institutions.
Now I come to the Health Sector. ºÉ´ÉäÇ £É´ÉxiÉÖ:
ºÉÖÉÊJÉxÉ, ºÉ´ÉäÇ ºÉÆiÉÖ: ÉÊxÉ®ÉàÉªÉÉ is the guiding
principle of my Government. Only Swasth Bharat can be a Samriddha
Bharat. India cannot realize its demographic dividend without its citizens
being healthy.
55.

56.
I am pleased to announce two major initiatives as part of
‘‘Ayushman Bharat’’ programme aimed at making path breaking
interventions to address health holistically, in primary, secondary and
tertiary care system covering both prevention and health promotion.
57.
The National Health Policy, 2017 has envisioned Health and
Wellness Centres as the foundation of India’s health system. These 1.5
lakh centres will bring health care system closer to the homes of people.
These centres will provide comprehensive health care, including for noncommunicable diseases and maternal and child health services. These
centres will also provide free essential drugs and diagnostic services.
I am committing `1200 crore in this budget for this flagship programme. I
also invite contribution of private sector through CSR and philanthropic
institutions in adopting these centres.
58.
Madam Speaker, we are all aware that lakhs of families in our
country have to borrow or sell assets to receive indoor treatment in
hospitals. Government is seriously concerned about such impoverishment
of poor and vulnerable families. Present Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana
(RSBY) provide annual coverage of only `30,000 to poor families. Several
State Governments have also implemented/supplemented health
protection schemes providing varying coverage. My Government has now
decided to take health protection to more aspirational level.
59.
We will launch a flagship National Health Protection Scheme to
cover over 10 crore poor and vulnerable families (approximately 50 crore
beneficiaries) providing coverage upto 5 lakh rupees per family per year
for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization. This will be the world’s
largest government funded health care programme. Adequate funds will
be provided for smooth implementation of this programme.

12
60.
Madam Speaker, these two far-reaching initiatives under the
Ayushman Bharat will build a New India 2022 and ensure enhanced
productivity, well being and avert wage loss and impoverishment. These
Schemes will also generate lakhs of jobs, particularly for women. The
Government is steadily but surely progressing towards the goal of Universal
Health Coverage.
61.
TB claims more lives every year than any other infectious disease.
It affects mainly poor and malnourished people. My Government has,
therefore, decided to allocate additional `600 crore to provide nutritional
support to all TB patients at the rate of `500 per month for the duration of
their treatment.
62.
In order to further enhance accessibility of quality medical
education and health care, we will be setting up 24 new Government
Medical Colleges and Hospitals by upgrading existing district hospitals in
the country. This would ensure that there is at least 1 Medical College for
every 3 Parliamentary Constituencies and at least 1 Government Medical
College in each State of the country.
63.
Our resolve of making our villages open defecation free is aimed at
improving the life of our villagers. We will launch a Scheme called
Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan (GOBAR-DHAN) for
management and conversion of cattle dung and solid waste in farms to
compost, fertilizer, bio-gas and bio-CNG.
64.
Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yojana (PMJJBY) has benefitted
5.22 crore families with a life insurance cover of `2 lakh on payment of a
premium of only `330/- per annum. Likewise, under Pradhan Mantri
Suraksha Bima Yojana, 13 crore 25 lakh persons have been insured with
personal accident cover of `2 lakh on payment of a premium of only `12
per annum. The Government will work to cover all poor households,
including SC/ST households, under these in a mission mode.
65.
The Government will expand the coverage under Prime Minister
Jan Dhan Yojana by bringing all sixty crore basic accounts within its fold
and undertake measures to provide services of micro insurance and
unorganized sector pension schemes through these accounts.
66.
Our commitment towards ‘‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’’ is unflinching.
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme launched in January 2015 has been a
great success. Until November, 2017 more than 1.26 crore accounts have

13
been opened across the country in the name of girl-child securing an
amount of `19,183 crore.
67.
Cleaning the Ganga is work of national importance and it is our
firm commitment. Members will be happy to learn that this work has
gathered speed. A total of 187 projects have been sanctioned under the
Namami Gange programme for infrastructure development, river surface
cleaning, rural sanitation and other interventions at a cost of
`16,713 crore. 47 projects have been completed and remaining projects
are at various stages of execution. All 4465 Ganga Grams – villages on
the bank of river - have been declared open defecation free.
68.
To give focused attention and to achieve our vision of an inclusive
society, the Government has identified 115 aspirational districts taking
various indices of development in consideration. The Government aims at
improving the quality of life in these districts by investing in social services
like health, education, nutrition, skill upgradation, financial inclusion and
infrastructure like irrigation, rural electrification, potable drinking water
and access to toilets at an accelerated pace and in a time bound manner.
We expect these 115 districts to become model of development.
69.
Economic and social advancement of hard working people of
Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) has received core
attention of Government. Our Government increased total earmarked
allocation for SCs in 279 programmes from `34,334 crore in 2016-17 to
`52,719 crore in RE 2017-18. Likewise, for STs, earmarked allocation was

increased from `21,811 crore in 2016-17 to `32,508 crore in
RE 2017-18 in 305 programmes. I propose an earmarked allocation of
`56,619 crore for SCs and `39,135 crore for STs in BE 2018-19.
70.
Government’s estimated schematic budgetary expenditure on
health, education and social protection for 2018-19 is `1.38 lakh crore
against estimated expenditure of `1.22 lakh crore in BE 2017-18. Details
are in Annexure II. This expenditure is likely to go up by at least `15,000
crore in 2018-19 on account of additional allocation during the year and
extra budgetary expenditure, including through Higher Education Financing
Agency.

Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSMEs) and
Employment

14
71.
Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSMEs) are a major engine
of growth and employment in the country.
I have provided
`3794 crore to MSME Sector for giving credit support, capital and interest
subsidy and innovations. Massive formalization of the businesses of
MSMEs is taking place in the country after demonetization and
introduction of GST. This is generating enormous financial information
database of MSMEs’ businesses and finances. This big data base will be
used for improving financing of MSMEs’ capital requirement, including
working capital.
72.
It is proposed to onboard public sector banks and corporates on
Trade Electronic Receivable Discounting System (TReDS) platform and link
this with GSTN. Online loan sanctioning facility for MSMEs will be
revamped for prompt decision making by the banks. Government will
soon announce measures for effectively addressing non-performing assets
and stressed accounts of MSMEs. This will enable larger financing of
MSMEs and also considerably ease cash flow challenges faced by them. In
order to reduce tax burden on MSMEs and to create larger number of
jobs, I will be announcing some tax measures in Part B of my speech.
73.
MUDRA Yojana launched in April, 2015 has led to sanction of `4.6
lakh crore in credit from 10.38 crore MUDRA loans. 76% of loan accounts
are of women and more than 50% belong to SCs, STs and OBCs. It is
proposed to set a target of `3 lakh crore for lending under MUDRA for
2018-19 after having successfully exceeded the targets in all previous
years.
74.
Non-Bank Finance Companies (NBFCs) stepped up financing of
MSMEs after demonetization. NBFCs can be very powerful vehicle for
delivering loans under MUDRA. Refinancing policy and eligibility criteria
set by MUDRA will be reviewed for better refinancing of NBFCs.
75.
Use of Fintech in financing space will help growth of MSMEs. A
group in the Ministry of Finance is examining the policy and institutional
development measures needed for creating right environment for Fintech
companies to grow in India.
76.
Venture Capital Funds and the angel investors need an innovative
and special developmental and regulatory regime for their growth. We
have taken a number of policy measures including launching ‘‘Start-Up
India’’ program, building very robust alternative investment regime in the
country and rolling out a taxation regime designed for the special nature
of the VCFs and the angel investors. We will take additional measures to

15
strengthen the environment for their growth and successful operation of
alternative investment funds in India.
77.
Creating job opportunities and facilitating generation of
employment has been at the core of our policy-making. During the last
three years, we have taken a number of steps to boost employment
generation in the country. These measures include:

Contribution of 8.33% of Employee Provident Fund (EPF) for
new employees by the Government for three years.



Contribution of 12% to EPF for new employees for three
years by the Government in sectors employing large
number of people like textile, leather and footwear.



Additional deduction to the employees of 30% of the wages
paid for new employees under the Income Tax Act.



Launch of National Apprenticeship Scheme with stipend
support and sharing of the cost of basic training by the
Government to give training to 50 lakh youth by 2020.



Introducing system of fixed term employment for apparel
and footwear sector.



Increasing paid maternity leave from 12 weeks to 26 weeks,
along with provision of crèches.

78.
These measures have started showing results. An independent
study conducted recently has shown that 70 lakh formal jobs will be
created this year.
79.
To carry forward this momentum, I am happy to announce that the
Government will contribute 12% of the wages of the new employees in
the EPF for all the sectors for next three years. Also, the facility of fixed
term employment will be extended to all sectors.
80.
To incentivize employment of more women in the formal sector
and to enable higher take-home wages, I propose to make amendments in
the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 to
reduce women employees' contribution to 8% for first three years of their
employment against existing rate of 12% or 10% with no change in
employers' contribution.

16
81.
The Government is setting up a model aspirational skill centre in
every district of the country under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra
Programme. 306 Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra have been established
for imparting skill training through such centers.
82.
The Government had approved a comprehensive textile sector
package of `6000 crore in 2016 to boost the apparel and made-up
segments. I, now propose to provide an outlay of `7148 crore for the
textile sector in 2018-19.

Infrastructure and Financial Sector Development
83.
Infrastructure is the growth driver of economy. Our country needs
massive investments estimated to be in excess of `50 lakh crore in
infrastructure to increase growth of GDP, connect and integrate the nation
with a network of roads, airports, railways, ports and inland waterways
and to provide good quality services to our people.
84.
We have made an all-time high allocation to rail and road sectors.
We are committed to further enhance public investment. Provision of key
linkages like coal for power, power for railways and railway rakes for coal
have been rationalized and made very efficient. Prime Minister personally
reviews the targets and achievements in infrastructure sectors on a
regular basis. Using online monitoring system of PRAGATI alone, projects
worth 9.46 lakh crore have been facilitated and fast tracked.
85.
To secure India’s defences, we are developing connectivity
infrastructure in border areas. Rohtang tunnel has been completed to
provide all weather connectivity to the Ladakh region. Contract for
construction of Zozila Pass tunnel of more than 14 kilometer is progressing
well. I now propose to take up construction of tunnel under Sela Pass. For
promoting tourism and emergency medical care, Government will make
necessary framework for encouraging investment in sea plane activities.
86.
Urbanization is our opportunity and priority. My Government has
rolled out two interlinked programmes – Smart Cities Mission and the
AMRUT.
87.
Smart Cities Mission aims at building 100 Smart Cities with state-ofthe-art amenities. I am happy to inform that 99 Cities have been selected
with an outlay of `2.04 lakh crore. These Cities have started implementing
various projects like Smart Command and Control Centre, Smart Roads,

17
Solar Rooftops, Intelligent Transport Systems, Smart Parks. Projects worth
`2350 crore have been completed and works of `20,852 crore are under
progress. To preserve and revitalize soul of the heritage cities in India,
National Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY)
has been taken up in a major way.
88.
India is blessed with an abundance of tourist attractions. It is
proposed to develop ten prominent tourist sites into Iconic Tourism
destinations by following a holistic approach involving infrastructure and
skill development, development of technology, attracting private
investment, branding and marketing. In addition, tourist amenities at 100
Adarsh monuments of the Archaeological Survey of India will be upgraded
to enhance visitor experience.
89.
The AMRUT programme focuses on providing water supply to all
households in 500 cities. State level plans of `77,640 crore for 500 cities
have been approved. Water supply contracts for 494 projects worth
`19,428 crore and sewerage work contract for 272 projects costing `12,429
crore has been awarded.
90.
Reforms are being catalyzed by these missions. 482 cities have
started credit rating. 144 cities have got investment grade rating.
91.
My Ministry will leverage the India Infrastructure Finance
Corporation Limited (IIFCL) to help finance major infrastructure projects,
including investments in educational and health infrastructure, on strategic
and larger societal benefit considerations.
92.
Our Government has scaled new heights in development of Road
Infrastructure sector. We are confident to complete National Highways
exceeding 9000 kilometers length during 2017-18. Ambitious Bharatmala
Pariyojana has been approved for providing seamless connectivity of
interior and backward areas and borders of the country to develop about
35000 kms in Phase-I at an estimated cost of `5,35,000 crore. To raise
equity from the market for its mature road assets, NHAI will consider
organizing its road assets into Special Purpose Vehicles and use innovative
monetizing structures like Toll, Operate and Transfer (TOT) and
Infrastructure Investment Funds (InvITs).
93.
Strengthening the railway network and enhancing Railways’
carrying capacity has been a major focus of the Government. Railways’
Capex for the year 2018-19 has been pegged at `1,48,528 crore. A large
part of the Capex is devoted to capacity creation. 18,000 kilometers of

18
doubling, third and fourth line works and 5000 kilometers of gauge
conversion would eliminate capacity constraints and transform almost
entire network into Broad Gauge.
94.
There has also been significant improvement in the achievement of
physical targets by Railways as well. We are moving fast towards optimal
electrification of railway network. 4000 kilometers are targeted for
commissioning during 2017-18.
95.
Work on Eastern and Western dedicated Freight Corridors is in full
swing. Adequate number of rolling stock – 12000 wagons, 5160 coaches
and approximately 700 locomotives are being procured during 2018-19. A
major programme has been initiated to strengthen infrastructure at the
Goods sheds and fast track commissioning of private sidings.
96.
A ‘Safety First’ policy, with allocation of adequate funds under
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh is cornerstone of Railways’ focus on safety.
Maintenance of track infrastructure is being given special attention. Over
3600 kms of track renewal is targeted during the current fiscal. Other
major steps include increasing use of technology like ‘‘Fog Safe’’ and
‘‘Train Protection and Warning System’’. A decision has been taken to
eliminate 4267 unmanned level crossings in the broad gauge network in
the next two years.
97.
Redevelopment of 600 major railway stations is being taken up by
Indian Railway Station Development Co. Ltd. All stations with more than
25000 footfalls will have escalators. All railway stations and trains will be
progressively provided with wi-fi. CCTVs will be provided at all stations
and on trains to enhance security of passengers. Modern train-sets with
state-of-the-art amenities and features are being designed at Integrated
Coach Factory, Perambur. First such train-set will be commissioned during
2018-19.
98.
Mumbai’s transport system, the lifeline of the City, is being
expanded and augmented to add 90 kilometers of double line tracks at a
cost of over `11,000 crore. 150 kilometers of additional suburban network
is being planned at a cost of over `40,000 crore, including elevated
corridors on some sections. A suburban network of approximately 160
kilometers at an estimated cost of `17,000 crore is being planned to cater
to the growth of the Bengaluru metropolis.
99.
Foundation for the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project, India’s
first high speed rail project was laid on September 14, 2017. An Institute is

19
coming up at Vadodara to train manpower required for high speed rail
projects.
100. In the last three years, the domestic air passenger traffic grew at
18% per annum and our airline companies placed orders for more than
900 aircrafts. Regional connectivity scheme of UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam
Nagrik) initiated by the Government last year shall connect 56 unserved
airports and 31 unserved helipads across the country. Operations have
already started at 16 such airports. ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEÉÒ <ºÉ {ÉcãÉ

ºÉä c´ÉÉ<Ç SÉ{{ÉãÉ {ÉcxÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉä xÉÉMÉÉÊ®BÉE
£ÉÉÒ c´ÉÉ<Ç VÉcÉVÉ àÉä ªÉÉjÉÉ BÉE® ®cä cé* Airport
Authority of India (AAI) has 124 airports. We propose to expand our
airport capacity more than five times to handle a billion trips a year under
a new initiative - NABH Nirman. Balance sheet of AAI shall be leveraged to
raise more resources for funding this expansion.
101. Our efforts to set up a Coalition on Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
for developing international good practices, appropriate standards and
regulatory mechanism for resilient infrastructure development are moving
well. I propose to allocate `60 crores to kick start this initiative in 2018-19.
102. The Government and market regulators have taken necessary
measures for development of monetizing vehicles like Infrastructure
Investment Trust (InvIT) and Real Investment Trust (ReITs) in India. The
Government would initiate monetizing select CPSE assets using InvITs from
next year.
103. In the current year, we included, in the scope of harmonized list of
infrastructure, ropeways to promote tourism, logistics parks and expanded
the scope of railways infrastructure to include development of commercial
land around railway stations.
104. Reserve Bank of India has issued guidelines to nudge Corporates
access bond market. SEBI will also consider mandating, beginning with
large Corporates, to meet about one-fourth of their financing needs from
the bond market.
105. Corporate bonds rated ‘BBB’ or equivalent are investment grade. In
India, most regulators permit bonds with the ‘AA’ rating only as eligible for
investment. It is now time to move from ‘AA’ to ‘A’ grade ratings. The
government and concerned regulators will take necessary action.

20
106. We will take reform measures with respect to stamp duty regime
on financial securities transactions in consultation with the States and
make necessary amendments the Indian Stamp Act.
107. International Financial Service Centre (IFSC) at Gift City, which has
become operational, needs a coherent and integrated regulatory
framework to fully develop and to compete with other offshore financial
centres. The Government will establish a unified authority for regulating
all financial services in IFSCs in India.
108. Global economy is transforming into a digital economy thanks to
development of cutting edge technologies in digital space – machine
learning, artificial intelligence, internet of things, 3D printing and the like.
Initiatives such as Digital India, Start Up India, Make in India would help
India establish itself as a knowledge and digital society. NITI Aayog will
initiate a national program to direct our efforts in the area of artificial
intelligence, including research and development of its applications.
109. Combining cyber and physical systems have great potential to
transform not only innovation ecosystem but also our economies and the
way we live. To invest in research, training and skilling in robotics, artificial
intelligence, digital manufacturing, big data analysis, quantum
communication and internet of things, Department of Science &
Technology will launch a Mission on Cyber Physical Systems to support
establishment of centres of excellence. I have doubled the allocation on
Digital India programme to ` 3073 crore in 2018-19.
110. Task of connecting one lakh gram panchayat through high speed
optical fiber network has been completed under phase I of the Bharatnet
project. This has enabled broadband access to over 20 crore rural Indians
in about two lakh fifty thousand villages. The Government also proposes
to setup five lakh wi-fi hotspots which will provide broadband access to
five crore rural citizens. I have provided `10000 crore in 2018-19 for
creation and augmentation of Telecom infrastructure.
111. To harness the benefit of emerging new technologies, particularly
the ‘Fifth Generation’ (5G) technologies and its adoption, the Department
of Telecom will support establishment of an indigenous 5G Test Bed at IIT,
Chennai.
112. Distributed ledger system or the block chain technology allows
organization of any chain of records or transactions without the need of
intermediaries. The Government does not consider crypto-currencies legal
tender or coin and will take all measures to eliminate use of these cryptoassets in financing illegitimate activities or as part of the payment system.

21
The Government will explore use of block chain technology proactively for
ushering in digital economy.
113. The system of toll payments physically by cash at road toll plazas is
being fast replaced with Fastags and other electronic payment systems to
make road travel seamless. Number of Fastags has gone up from about
60,000 in December, 2016 to more than 10 lakh now. From December,
2017 all class ‘‘M’’ and ‘‘N’’ vehicles are being sold only with the Fastags.
The Government will come out with a policy to introduce toll system on
‘‘pay as you use’’ basis.
114. In order to create employment and aid growth, Government’s
estimated budgetary and extra budgetary expenditure on infrastructure
for 2018-19 is being increased to `5.97 lakh crore against estimated
expenditure of `4.94 lakh crore in 2017-18. Details are in Annexure III.

Building Institutions and Improving Public Service Delivery
115. Our armed forces have played a stellar role in meeting the
challenges we have been facing on our borders as well as in managing the
internal security environment both in Jammu and Kashmir and the North
East. I would like to place on record our appreciation for the efforts and
the sacrifices made by the three services in defending the interests of the
Nation.
116. Ever since the NDA Government has assumed office in 2014, lot of
emphasis has been given to modernizing and enhancing the operational
capability of the Defence Forces. A number of initiatives have been taken
to develop and nurture intrinsic defence production capability to make the
Nation self-reliant for meeting our defence needs. Ensuring adequate
budgetary support will be our priority.
117. We have opened up private investment in defence production
including liberalizing foreign direct investment. We will take measures to
develop two defence industrial production corridors in the country. The
Government will also bring out an industry friendly Defence Production
Policy 2018 to promote domestic production by public sector, private
sector and MSMEs.
118. Aadhar has provided an identity to every Indian. Aadhar has eased
delivery of so many public services to our people. Every enterprise, major
or small, also needs a unique ID. The Government will evolve a Scheme to
assign
every
individual
enterprise
in
India
a
unique ID.

22
119. To carry the business reforms for ease of doing business deeper
and in every State of India, the Government of India has identified 372
specific business reform actions. All States have taken up these reforms
and simplifications in a mission mode constructively competing with each
other. Evaluation of performance under this Programme will now be
based on user feedback.
120. Capital of the Food Corporation of India will be restructured to
enhance equity and to raise long-term debt for meeting its standing
working capital requirement.
121. Budgeting of Government of India’s contribution in equity and debt
of the metro ventures floated by the State Governments will be
streamlined.
122. Department of Commerce will be developing a National Logistics
Portal as a single window online market place to link all stakeholders.
123. The Government has approved listing of 14 CPSEs, including two
insurance companies, on the stock exchanges. The Government has also
initiated the process of strategic disinvestment in 24 CPSEs. This includes
strategic privatization of Air India.
124. Process of acquisition of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation by the
ONGC has been successfully completed. Three public sector general
insurance companies National Insurance Company Ltd., United India
Assurance Company Limited and Oriental India Insurance Company Limited
will be merged into a single insurance entity and will be subsequently
listed.
125. The Government introduced Exchange Traded Fund Bharat-22 to
raise `14,500 crore, which was over-subscribed in all segments. DIPAM will
come up with more ETF offers including debt ETF.
126. 2017-18 Budget Estimates for disinvestment were pegged at the
highest ever level of `72,500 crore. I am happy to inform the House that
we have already exceeded the budget estimates. I am assuming receipts of
`1,00,000 crore in 2017-18. I am setting the disinvestment target of
`80,000 crore for 2018-19.

127. Bank recapitalization program has been launched with bonds of
`80,000 crore being issued this year. The programme has been integrated
with an ambitious reform agenda, under the rubric of an Enhanced Access
and Service Excellence (EASE) programme. This recapitalization will pave

23
the way for the public sector banks to lend additional credit of `5 lakh
crore.
128. It is proposed to allow strong Regional Rural Banks to raise capital
from the market to enable them increase their credit to rural economy.
129. National Housing Bank Act is being amended to transfer its equity
from the Reserve Bank of India to the Government. Indian Post Offices
Act, Provident Fund Act and National Saving Certificate Act are being
amalgamated and certain additional people friendly measures are being
introduced. To provide the Reserve Bank of India an instrument to manage
excess liquidity, Reserve Bank of India Act is being amended to
institutionalize an Uncollateralized Deposit Facility. Securities and
Exchange Board of India, Act 1992, Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act
1956, and Depositories Act 1996, are being amended to streamline
adjudication procedures and to provide for penalties for certain
infractions. These proposals are in the Finance Bill.
130. For easier access, links to all Detailed Demand for Grants will be
provided at india.gov.in. The Government will also consider feasibility of
providing disclosed fiscal information in a machine readable form.
131. The Government is transforming method of disposal of its business
by introduction of e-office and other e-governance initiatives in central
Ministries and Departments. These initiatives are listed in Annexure IV.
132. The Government will formulate a comprehensive Gold Policy to
develop gold as an asset class. The Government will also establish a
system of consumer friendly and trade efficient system of regulated gold
exchanges in the country. Gold Monetization Scheme will be revamped to
enable people to open a hassle-free Gold Deposit Account.
133. Outward Direct Investment (ODI) from India has grown to US$15
billion per annum. The Government will review existing guidelines and
processes and bring out a coherent and integrated Outward Direct
Investment (ODI) policy.
134. Hybrid instruments are suitable for attracting foreign investments
in several niche areas, especially for the startups and venture capital firms.
The Government will evolve a separate policy for the hybrid instruments.
135. The emoluments of the President, the Vice President and the
Governors were last revised with effect from 1st January, 2006. These
emoluments are proposed to be revised to `5 lakh for the President,
`4 lakhs for the Vice President and to `3.5 lakh per month for the

Governors.

24
136. There has been a public debate with regard to the emoluments
paid to the Members of Parliament. Present practice allows the recipients
to fix their own emoluments which invites criticism. I am, therefore,
proposing necessary changes to refix the salary, constituency allowance,
office expenses and meeting allowance payable to Members of Parliament
with effect from April 1, 2018. The law will also provide for automatic
revision of emoluments every five years indexed to inflation. I am sure
Hon’ble Members will welcome this initiative and will not suffer such
criticism in future.
137. Our country will commemorate 150th birth anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi, Father of the Nation, from 2nd October, 2019 to 2nd
October 2020. The Government and the People of India will rededicate
them, through their actions, to the ideals that the Mahatma taught and
lived by. A National Committee, chaired by the Prime Minister, which
includes Chief Ministers of all the States, representatives from across the
political spectrum, Gandhians, thinkers and eminent persons from all walks
of life, has been constituted to formulate a Commemoration Programme.
My Government has earmarked `150 crore for the year 2018-19 for the
activities leading to the Commemoration.

Section III - Fiscal Management
138. I now turn to the fiscal situation for 2017-18 and fiscal estimates
for 2018-19.
139. In 2017-18, Central Government will be receiving GST revenues
only for 11 months, instead of 12 months. This will have fiscal effect.
There has also been some shortfall in Non-Tax revenues on account of
certain developments, including deferment of spectrum auction. A part of
this shortfall has been made up through higher direct tax revenues and
bigger disinvestment receipts.
140. Total Revised Estimates for expenditure in 2017-18 are `21.57 lakh
crore (net of GST compensation transfers to the States) as against the
Budget Estimates of `21.47 lakh crore.
141. Our Government assumed office in May, 2014 when fiscal deficit
was running at very high levels. Fiscal Deficit for 2013-14 was 4.4% of GDP.
The Prime Minister and the Government have always attached utmost
priority to prudent fiscal management and controlling fiscal deficit. As
Hon’ble Members would recall, we embarked on the path of consistent
fiscal reduction and consolidation in 2014. Fiscal Deficit was brought
down to 4.1% in 2014-15 to 3.9% in 2015-16, and to 3.5% in 2016-17.

25
Revised Fiscal Deficit estimates for 2017-18 are `5.95 lakh crore at 3.5% of
GDP. I am projecting a Fiscal Deficit of 3.3% of GDP for the year 2018-19.
142. In order to impart unquestionable credibility to the Government’s
commitment for the revised fiscal glide path, I am proposing to accept key
recommendations of the Fiscal Reform and Budget Management
Committee relating to adoption of the Debt Rule and to bring down
Central Government’s Debt to GDP ratio to 40%. Government has also
accepted the recommendation to use Fiscal Deficit target as the key
operational parameter. Necessary amendment proposals are included in
the Finance Bill.

26
PART B
Madam Speaker,
143.

I shall now present my tax proposals.

144. The attempts made by our Government for reducing the cash
economy and for increasing the tax net have paid rich dividends. The
growth rate of direct taxes in the financial years 2016-17 and 2017-18 has
been significant. We ended the last year with a growth of 12.6% in direct
taxes and in the current year, the growth in direct taxes up to 15 th January,
2018 is 18.7%. The average buoyancy in personal income tax of seven years
preceding these two years comes to 1.1. In simple terms tax buoyancy of
1.1 means that if nominal GDP growth rate of the country is 10%, the
growth rate of personal income tax is 11%. However, the buoyancy in
personal income tax for financial years 2016-17 and 2017-18 (RE) is 1.95
and 2.11 respectively. This indicates that the excess revenue collected in
the last two financial years from personal income tax compared to the
average buoyancy pre 2016-17 amounts to a total of about `90,000 crores
and the same can be attributed to the strong anti-evasion measures taken
by the Government.
145. Similarly, there has been huge increase in the number of returns
filed by taxpayers. In financial year 2016-17, 85.51 lakhs new taxpayers filed
their returns of income as against 66.26 lakhs in the immediately preceding
year. By including all filers as well as persons who did not file returns but
paid tax by way of advance tax or TDS, we can derive the figure of Effective
Taxpayer Base. This number of effective tax payer base increased from 6.47
crores at the beginning of F.Y.14-15 to 8.27 crores at the end of F.Y.16-17.
We are enthused by this success of our measures and we pledge to
continue to take all such measures in future by which the black money is
contained and the honest taxpayers are rewarded. Demonetization was
received well by honest taxpayers as “imandari ka utsav” only for this
reason.
146. Madam Speaker, recognising the need for facilitating compliance,
Government had liberalized the presumptive income scheme for small
traders and entrepreneurs with annual turnover of less than `2 crores and
introduced a similar scheme for professionals with annual turnover of less
than `50 lakhs with the hope that there would be significant increase in
compliance. Under this scheme, 41% more returns were filed during this
year which shows that many more persons are joining the tax net under
simplified scheme. However, the turnover shown is still not encouraging.

27
The Department has received 44.72 lakh returns for assessment year
2017-18 from individual, HUF and firms with a meagre average turnover of
`17.97 lakhs and an average tax payment of `7,000/- only. The tax
compliance behaviour of professionals is no better; the department has
received 5.68 lakh returns under the presumptive income scheme for
assessment year 2017-18 with average gross receipts of `5.73 lakhs only.
Average tax paid by them is only `35,000/-.
Tax incentive for promoting post-harvest activities of agriculture
147. Madam Speaker, at present, hundred per cent deduction is allowed
in respect of profit of co-operative societies which provide assistance to its
members engaged in primary agricultural activities. Over the last few years,
a number of Farmer Producer Companies have been set up along the lines
of co-operative societies which also provide similar assistance to their
members. In order to encourage professionalism in post-harvest value
addition in agriculture, I propose to allow hundred per cent deduction to
these companies registered as Farmer Producer Companies and having
annual turnover up to `100 crores in respect of their profit derived from
such activities for a period of five years from financial year 2018-19. This
measure will encourage “Operation Greens” mission announced by me
earlier and it will give a boost to Sampada Yojana.
Employment generation
148. Currently, a deduction of 30% is allowed in addition to normal
deduction of 100 % in respect of emoluments paid to eligible new
employees who have been employed for a minimum period of 240 days
during the year under section 80-JJAA of the Income-tax Act. However, the
minimum period of employment is relaxed to 150 days in the case of
apparel industry. In order to encourage creation of new employment,
I propose to extend this relaxation to footwear and leather industry.
Further, I also propose to rationalise this deduction of 30% by allowing the
benefit for a new employee who is employed for less than the minimum
period during the first year but continues to remain employed for the
minimum period in subsequent year.
Incentive for real estate
149. Currently, while taxing income from capital gains, business profits
and other sources in respect of transactions in immovable property, the
consideration or circle rate value, whichever is higher, is adopted and the
difference is counted as income both in the hands of the purchaser and
seller. Sometimes, this variation can occur in respect of different properties

28
in the same area because of a variety of factors including shape of the plot
and location. In order to minimize hardship in real estate transaction,
I propose to provide that no adjustment shall be made in a case where the
circle rate value does not exceed 5% of the consideration.
Incentivising micro, small and medium entrepreneurs
150. In the Union Budget, 2017, I had announced the reduction of
corporate tax rate to 25% for companies whose turnover was less than `50
crore in financial year 2015-16. This benefitted 96% of the total companies
filing tax returns. Towards fulfilment of my promise to reduce corporate tax
rate in a phased manner, I now propose to extend the benefit of this
reduced rate of 25% also to companies who have reported turnover up to
`250 crore in the financial year 2016-17. This will benefit the entire class of
micro, small and medium enterprises which accounts for almost 99% of
companies filing their tax returns. The estimate of revenue forgone due to
this measure is `7,000 crores during the financial year 2018-19. After this,
out of about 7 lakh companies filing returns, about 7,000 companies which
file returns of income and whose turnover is above `250 crores will remain
in 30% slab. The lower corporate income tax rate for 99% of the companies
will leave them with higher investible surplus which in turn will create more
jobs.
Relief to salaried taxpayers
151. The Government had made many positive changes in the personal
income-tax rate applicable to individuals in the last three years. Therefore,
I do not propose to make any further change in the structure of the income
tax rates for individuals. There is a general perception in the society that
individual business persons have better income as compared to salaried
class. However, income tax data analysis suggests that major portion of
personal income-tax collection comes from the salaried class. For
assessment year 2016-17, 1.89 crore salaried individuals have filed their
returns and have paid total tax of `1.44 lakh crores which works out to
average tax payment of `76,306/- per individual salaried taxpayer. As
against this, 1.88 crores individual business taxpayers including
professionals, who filed their returns for the same assessment year paid
total tax of `48,000 crores which works out to an average tax payment of
`25,753/- per individual business taxpayer. In order to provide relief to

salaried taxpayers, I propose to allow a standard deduction of `40,000/- in
lieu of the present exemption in respect of transport allowance and
reimbursement of miscellaneous medical expenses. However, the transport

29
allowance at enhanced rate shall continue to be available to differentlyabled persons. Also other medical reimbursement benefits in case of
hospitalization etc., for all employees shall continue. Apart from reducing
paper work and compliance, this will help middle class employees even
more in terms of reduction in their tax liability. This decision to allow
standard deduction shall significantly benefit the pensioners also, who
normally do not enjoy any allowance on account of transport and medical
expenses. The revenue cost of this decision is approximately `8,000 crores.
The total number of salaried employees and pensioners who will benefit
from this decision is around 2.5 crores.
Relief to senior citizen
152. A life with dignity is a right of every individual in general, more so for
the senior citizens. To care of those who cared for us is one of the highest
honours. To further the objective of providing a dignified life, I propose to
announce the following incentives for senior citizens:


Exemption of interest income on deposits with banks and post
offices to be increased from `10,000/- to `50,000/- and TDS shall not
be required to be deducted on such income, under section 194A.
This benefit shall be available also for interest from all fixed deposits
schemes and recurring deposit schemes.



Raising the limit of deduction for health insurance premium and/ or
medical expenditure from `30,000/- to `50,000/-, under section 80D.
All senior citizens will now be able to claim benefit of deduction up
to `50,000/- per annum in respect of any health insurance premium
and/or any general medical expenditure incurred.



Raising the limit of deduction for medical expenditure in respect of
certain critical illness from, `60,000/- in case of senior citizens and
from `80,000/- in case of very senior citizens, to `1 lakh in respect of
all senior citizens, under section 80DDB.

These concessions will give extra tax benefit of `4,000 crores to senior
citizens. In addition to tax concessions, I propose to extend the Pradhan
Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana up to March, 2020 under which an assured
return of 8% is given by Life Insurance Corporation of India. The existing
limit on investment of `7.5 lakh per senior citizen under this scheme is also
being enhanced to `15 lakh.
Tax incentive for International Financial Services Centre (IFSC)

30
153. The Government had endeavoured to develop a world class
international financial services centre in India. In recent years, various
measures including tax incentives have been provided in order to fulfil this
objective. To further this objective, I propose to provide two more
concessions for IFSC. In order to promote trade in stock exchanges located
in IFSC, I propose to exempt transfer of derivatives and certain securities by
non-residents from capital gains tax. Further, non-corporate taxpayers
operating in IFSC shall be charged Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT) at
concessional rate of 9% at par with Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT)
applicable for corporates.
Further Measures to control cash economy:
154. Currently, the income of trusts and institutions is exempt if they
utilise their income towards their objects in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Income-tax Act. However, there is no restriction on these
entities for incurring expenditure in cash. In order to have audit trail of the
expenses incurred by these entities, it is proposed that payments exceeding
`10,000/- in cash made by such entities shall be disallowed and the same
shall be subject to tax. Further, in order to improve TDS compliance by
these entities, I propose to provide that in case of non-deduction of tax,
30% of the amount shall be disallowed and the same shall be taxed.
Rationalisation of Long Term Capital Gains (LTCG)
155. Madam Speaker, currently, long term capital gains arising from
transfer of listed equity shares, units of equity oriented fund and unit of a
business trust are exempt from tax. With the reforms introduced by the
Government and incentives given so far, the equity market has become
buoyant. The total amount of exempted capital gains from listed shares and
units is around `3,67,000 crores as per returns filed for A.Y.17-18. Major
part of this gain has accrued to corporates and LLPs. This has also created a
bias against manufacturing, leading to more business surpluses being
invested in financial assets. The return on investment in equity is already
quite attractive even without tax exemption. There is therefore a strong
case for bringing long term capital gains from listed equities in the tax net.
However, recognising the fact that vibrant equity market is essential for
economic growth, I propose only a modest change in the present regime.
I propose to tax such long term capital gains exceeding `1 lakh at the rate of
10% without allowing the benefit of any indexation. However, all gains up
to 31st January, 2018 will be grandfathered. For example, if an equity share
is purchased six months before 31st January, 2018 at `100/- and the highest
price quoted on 31st January, 2018 in respect of this share is `120/-, there

31
will be no tax on the gain of `20/- if this share is sold after one year from the
date of purchase. However, any gain in excess of `20 earned after 31st
January, 2018 will be taxed at 10% if this share is sold after 31 st July, 2018.
The gains from equity share held up to one year will remain short term
capital gain and will continue to be taxed at the rate of 15%. Further,
I also propose to introduce a tax on distributed income by equity oriented
mutual fund at the rate of 10%. This will provide level playing field across
growth oriented funds and dividend distributing funds. In view of
grandfathering, this change in capital gain tax will bring marginal revenue
gain of about `20,000 crores in the first year. The revenues in subsequent
years may be more.
Health and Education Cess
156. Madam Speaker, at present there is a three per cent cess on
personal income tax and corporation tax consisting of two per cent cess for
primary education and one per cent cess for secondary and higher
education. In order to take care of the needs of education and health of BPL
and rural families, I have announced programs in Part A of my speech. To
fund this, I propose to increase the cess by one per cent. The existing three
per cent education cess will be replaced by a four per cent “Health and
Education Cess” to be levied on the tax payable. This will enable us to
collect an estimated additional amount of `11,000 crores.
E-assessment.
157. We had introduced e-assessment in 2016 on a pilot basis and in
2017, extended it to 102 cities with the objective of reducing the interface
between the department and the taxpayers. With the experience gained so
far, we are now ready to roll out the E-assessment across the country,
which will transform the age-old assessment procedure of the income tax
department and the manner in which they interact with taxpayers and
other stakeholders. Accordingly, I propose to amend the Income-tax Act to
notify a new scheme for assessment where the assessment will be done in
electronic mode which will almost eliminate person to person contact
leading to greater efficiency and transparency.
158. My other tax proposals on direct tax are listed in Annexure 5 of my
speech.
Indirect Tax.
159. On the Indirect Taxes side, this is the first budget after the roll out of
the Goods and Service Tax. Excise duties to a large extent and service tax

32
have been subsumed in GST, along with corresponding duties on imports.
Hence, my budget proposals are mainly on the customs side.
160. In this budget, I am making a calibrated departure from the
underlying policy in the last two decades, wherein the trend largely was to
reduce the customs duty. There is substantial potential for domestic value
addition in certain sectors, like food processing, electronics, auto
components, footwear and furniture. To further incentivise the domestic
value addition and Make in India in some such sectors, I propose to increase
customs duty on certain items. I propose to increase customs duty on
mobile phones from 15% to 20%, on some of their parts and accessories to
15% and on certain parts of TVs to 15%. This measure will promote creation
of more jobs in the country. Details of changes made in rates of customs
duty as well as certain changes made in the excise duty structure are given
in Annexure 6 to my speech.
161. To help the cashew processing industry, I propose to reduce
customs duty on raw cashew from 5% to 2.5%.
162. I propose to abolish the Education Cess and Secondary and Higher
Education Cess on imported goods, and in its place impose a Social Welfare
Surcharge, at the rate of 10% of the aggregate duties of Customs, on
imported goods, to provide for social welfare schemes of the Government.
Goods which were hitherto exempt from Education Cesses on imported
goods will, however, be exempt from this Surcharge. In addition, certain
specified goods, mentioned in the Annexure 6 to my speech will attract the
proposed Surcharge at the rate of 3% of the aggregate duties of customs
only.
163. I also propose to make certain changes to the Customs Act, 1962, to
further improve ease of doing business in cross border trade, and to align
certain provisions with the commitments under the Trade Facilitation
Agreement. To smoothen dispute resolution processes and to reduce
litigation, certain amendments are being made, to provide for pre-notice
consultation, definite timelines for adjudication and deemed closure of
cases if those timelines are not adhered to.
164. With the roll out of GST, I propose to change the name of Central
Board of Excise and Customs [CBEC] to Central Board of Indirect Taxes and
Customs (CBIC). The necessary changes in law for this are proposed in the
Finance Bill.
165. Madam, while making the proposals in this year’s Budget, we have
been guided by our mission to especially strengthen agriculture, rural

33
development, health, education, employment, MSME and infrastructure
sectors of Indian economy. I am sure the New India which we aspire to
create now will emerge. Swami Vivekanand had also envisioned decades
ago in his Memoirs of European Travel, ‘‘You merge yourselves in the void
and disappear, and let new India arise in your place. Let her arise – out of
the peasants’ cottage, grasping the plough; out of the huts of the fisherman.
Let her spring from the grocer’s shop, from beside the oven of the fritterseller. Let her emanate from the factory, from marts, and from markets.
Let her emerge from groves and forests, from hills and mountains’’.
166. With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Budget to the
House.

34
Annexure I
(as referred in para 45)

Budgetary & Non-Budgetary Resources on Agriculture & other Livelihood
Programmes in Rural Area

35
(`crore)
Name of
Scheme

Infrastructure/
Livelihood /
Both

2018-19 targets
Physical Target

Financial Target
GBS

EBR

Total

15000

15000

M/o Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
PMKSY-AIBP

Infrastructure

48 AIBP priority
Projects by December
2019

PMKSY-HKKP
(CADWM)

Infrastructure

Utilisation of irrigation
potential of 15 lakh
Hectare

Other Schemes
Both
of MoWR,
RD&GR
Sub-total MoWR,RD&GR

2300

2300

1461

1461

3761

15000

18761

Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
Pradhan Mantri
Fasal Bima
Yojna
Interest Subsidy
for short term
credit to
Farmers
Pradhan Mantri
Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana

Livelihood

National Food
Security
Mission
Sub Mission on
Agricultural
Mechanization

Livelihood

13000

13000

15000

15000

4000

4000

Infrastructure

Irrigation projects
covering 17.2 lakh ha

Livelihood

15 lakh beneficiaries

Livelihood

1.81 lakh beneficiaries

1500

1500

Infrastructure

62466 centres for
Agriculture Machinery
and equipment, Farm
Machinery Banks, HiTech Productive
Equipment
17.81 lakh
beneficiaries
10,45,878 Cold
Storage, Godowns,
Glass Houses, Custom
Hiring Centers, Soil/
Seed Testing Labs, etc.
116.99 lakh
beneficiaries

1100

1100

3100

3100

Livelihood
Rashtriya Krishi
Vikas Yojana
(RKVY)

98 million ha Gross
Crop Area

Infrastructure

Livelihood

36
Mission for
Integrated
Development of
Horticulture
Other Schemes
of D/o AC&FW

Infrastructure

3,30,436 centres

1599

1599

Both

2912

2912

Sub-total of D/o AC&FW

42211

42211

Ministry of Food Processing
Scheme for
Mega Food
Parks

Infrastructure
Livelihood

12 Mega Food Parks
Direct & indirect
employment to 95000
persons in 2017-18 &
2018-19

390

1170

1560

Scheme for
Cold Chain and
Value Addition
Infrastructure

Infrastructure

101 projects

220

880

1100

Livelihood

Direct: 12000 &
indirect: 63000
employment in 201718 & 2018-19

Other Schemes
Both
of M/o Food
Processing
Sub-total of M/o Food
Processing
Department of Agriculture, Research and Education

210

640

850

820

2690

3510

DARE

7800

7800

7800

7800

Livelihood

Production of 21960
tons Seeds, 255 lakh
nos. planting material,
132.5 lakh nos. Animal
resources
1.60 lakh Frontline
demonstration
450 Farm level
trainings
20 lakh Human
Resources
development
Infrastructure/ Basic
amenities
development in 98
SAUs, 681 existing
KVKs & 59 new KVKs

Sub-total of DARE
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation
Swachh Bharat
Mission
(Gramin)

Infrastructure
Livelihood

(a) 1.88 crore
Household toilets (b)
Employment: 16.92
crore Persondays

15343

15000

30343

37
National Rural
Drinking Water
Programme
(NRDWP)

Infrastructure

Livelihood

Infrastructure creation
through Piped Water
Supply Schemes and
Community Water
Purification Plants 84000 habitats
Livelihood generation
- 84000

Sub-total of M/o DWS

7000

22343

7000

15000

37343

12000

33000

Ministry of Rural Development/ Department of Rural Development
Pradhan Mantri Both
Awaas Yojana Gramin (PMAY-G)
Pradhan Mantri Both
Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY)
Mahatma
Infrastructure
Gandhi National
Rural
Employement
Guarantee
Programme
(MGNREGA)

Livelihood

National
Livelihood
MissionAajeevika NRLM

Livelihood
under NRLM
including
MKSP, SVEP,
Skill
Development

49 lakh houses, 46.55
crore Mandays

21000

57,000 km roads &
28.35 crore Mandays

19000

19000

8552 AWC, 2.60 lakh
Kms. of Rural Roads,
1.83 lakh
Vermi/NADEP
Compost, 675 Food
Storage Godowns,
8340 GP
Bhawan/Bharat
Nirman Seva Kendra
I. Cattle Shed/ Poultry
Shelter/ Piggery shed 99648
II. Land Development 1.65 lakh
230 cr Persondays

55000

55000

9 lakh nos. of new
SHGs to be formed
Number of Mahila
Kisan to be supported5 lakh
Value Chain
Development Project15
Number of SVEP
enterprises-25000
Number of Trainess to
be Skilled - 4 lakh

5750

5750

Sub-total of D/o Rural
100750
Development
Ministry of Rural Development/ Department of Land Resources
1. Watershed
Development
Component of
Pradhan Mantri

Infrastructure

1.30 lakh nos.Water
Harvesting Structures
to be
created/rejuvenated

2146

12000

112750

2146

38
Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana (WDCPMKSY)
Livelihood

1.81 lakhs ha area to
be brought under
protective irrigation
3. No. of farmers
benefitted -5.01 lakh

Other Schemes of D/o Land
Resources
Sub-total of D/o Land
Development
Ministry of Power
Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti
Yojana
(DDUGJY)

Infrastructure

Pradhan Mantri
Sahaj Bijli Har
Ghar Yojana
(Saubhagya)
Sub-total of M/o Power

(i) Intensive
electrification of
villages - 1 lakh nos.
(ii) Feeder segregation
including new 11 KV
Lines - 1 lakh Circuit
Km
(iii) Commissioning of
Substations (New &
Augmentation) - 600
nos.
Electricity connections
to Households - 175
lakh nos.

250

250

2396

2396

3800

15000

2750

6550

18800

2750

15000

21550

Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises
Prime
Livelihood
Minister's
Employment
Generation
Programme
(PMEGP)
Other Schemes Both
of MSME
Sub-total of MSME

49000 projects
294000 Employment

1260

1260

1648

1648

2908

2908

45069

45069

348

348

45417

45417

Ministry of Panchayati Raj
Fourteenth
Both
Finance
Commission
(FFC) Grant to
Gram
Panchayats for
the period
2015-2020
Other Schemes
Both
of M/o
Panchayati Raj
Sub-total of M/o Pachayati Raj

Works at Gram
Panchayat level in
focus areas of Health
& Sanitation, Drinking
Water, Rural
Electrification,
Maintenance of
Community Assets, etc

39
Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship
PMKVY 2.0

Livelihood

Sub-total of M/o Skill
Development
Department of Financial Services

18 lakh beneficiaries

1171

1171

1171

1171

Agriculture
Livelihood
Credit
Micro Irrigation
Fund
Rural
Infrastructure
Infrastrucure
Development
Fund (RIDF)
NABARD
Infrastructure
Development
Assistance
(NIDA)
Dairy Infra
Development
Fund (DIDF)
Fisheries &
Aquaculture
Infra
Development
(FIDF)
Agri-market
Infrastructure
Sub-total D/o Financial Services
Total

236127

1100000

1100000

2000

2000

28000

28000

3500

3500

2000

2000

1000

1000

2000

2000

1138500

1138500

1198190

1434317

Note: The above allocations are specific for infrastructure and livelihood
development in agri and Rural sector

Annexure II
(As referred in Para 70)

Schematic outlays under Education, Health and
Social Protection Sectors
(Schematic Outlays)
Ministry/Department/Scheme Name
2017-18

201819

40

Health & Family Welfare

47,353

52,800

CSS+CS in Health
of which
PMSSY
National AIDS and STD Control programmme
National Rural Health Mission
National Urban Health Mission
Human Resoruces for Health & Medical
Education
Tertiary care programme
RSBY

34,657

39,199

3,975
2,000
21,189
752
4,025

3,825
2,100
24,280
875
4,225

725
1,000

750
2,000

AYUSH
CSS+CS
of which
NAM

1,429
509

1,626
576

441

504

Health Research

1,500

1,800

School Education
CSS+CS
of which
SSA
RMSA
Mid day meal

46,356
38,981

50,000
42,391

23,500
3,830
10,000

26,129
4,022
10,500

Higher Education
CS+CSS
of which
Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan
(RUSA)
Interest subsidy and contribution for
guarantee fund
HEFA
e-Shodh Sindu
Technical Education- Quality Improvement
Programme
Scholarship for College and University
Students

33,330
5,526

35,010
8,512

1,300

1,400

1,950

2,150

250
240
260

2,750
180
275

320

340

41
Programme for Apprenticeship Training Scholarships & Stipentes
World Class Institutions
Setting up of virtual class room
Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on
Teachers and Teaching
ABs
of which
Indian Institutes of Technology
IIM

110

125

50
75
120

250
90
120

26,896

25,339

7,856
1,030

6,326
1,036

9,500

9,975

6,908
6,836

7,750
7,670

50
3,348
800

125
3,000
1,000

885
142
230

1,100
232
300

Empowerment of Persons with Disability

855

1,070

CS+CSS
of which
Assistance to Disabled Persons for purchase/
fitting of Aids and appliances
Schemes for Implementation of Persons with
Disability Act

559

744

150

220

207

300

Department of Women and Child
Development
CSS
of which
Anganwadi Services
Schemes for Adolescent girls
Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana

22,095

24,700

21,844

24,454

15,245
460
2,700

16,335
500
2,400

Rural Development
National Social Assistance Program
Social Justice
CS+CSS
of which
Prematric Scholarship (SC)
Post-matric scholarship (SC)
Special Central Assistance to SC sub
schemes
Post-matric scholarship for OBC
Pre-matric scholarship for OBC
National fellowship for SCs

42
Nirbhaya Fund Schemes
Child Protection Scheme
National Nutrition Mission
Mission for protection and empowerment of
women (Umbrella)

500
648
1,500
1,089

500
725
3,000
1,366

Minority Affairs
CS+CSS
of which
Education Empowerment
Skill Development & Livelihood
MSDP

4,195
3,969

4,700
4,460

2,054
635
1,200

2,453
602
1,320

TOTAL of Schemes (CS+CSS)

1,22,381

1,37,98
1

Demand/Ministry-wise
Total featured above, except for
MoRD

1,64,020

1,79,457

Annexure III
(As referred in Para 114)

Capital Outlay on Infrastructure Sector

Ministry/Deptt.
Scheme/CPSEs
1. Ministry of Coal i) Coal India Limited
(10)
ii) NLC India Limited
iii) Singareni Colleries
Co. Ltd.
Total
2. Ministry of
i)Central Pool of
Development of
Resources for North
North Eastern
East and Sikkim
Region (23)
ii) Construction/
Improvement of Roads
of Economic
Importance

RE 2017-18
GBS
IEBR
0
8500

` crore
BE 2018-19
GBS
IEBR
0
9500

0
0

4578
1400

0
0

4299
2000

0
175

14478
0

0
310

15799
0

5

0

40

0

43
iii) North East Road
Sector Develop.
Scheme- Programme
Component
Total
3. Ministry of
New and
Renewable
Energy (67)

i) Indian Renewable
Energy Development
Agency
ii) Solar Energy
Corporation of India

Total
4. Ministry of
Petroleum and
Natural Gas (72)

i) Payment to Indian
Strategic Petroleum
Reserve Ltd. (ISPRL) for
Crude Oil Reserve
ii) Phulpur Dhamra
Haldia Pipeline Project
iii) National Seismic
Programme
iv) Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd.
v) Chennai Petroleum
Corp. Ltd.
vi) Engineers India Ltd.
vii) Gas Authority of
India Ltd.
viii) Hindustan
Petroleum Corp. Ltd.
ix) Indian Oil Corp. Ltd.
x) Mangalore
Refineries and
Petrochemicals Ltd.
xi) Numaligarh Refinery
Ltd.
xii) Oil and Natural Gas
Corp. Ltd.
xiii) Oil India Ltd.
xiv) Oil Natural Gas
Corp. Videsh Ltd.

Total
5. Ministry of
Power (74)

i) 220 KV Transmission
line from Srinagar to
Leh via Kargil
ii) Damodar Valley

150

0

250

0

330
0

0
9287

600
0

0
10099

50

179

0

217

50
1121

9466
0

0
701

10317
0

400

0

1674

0

10

0

1300

0

0

7800

0

7400

0

865

0

1010

0
0

0
3309

0
0

1356
4722

0

7110

0

8425

0
0

18849
1138

0
0

22862
744

0

375

0

428

0

37218

0

32077

0
0

4263
6393

0
0

4300
5886

1531
500

87319
0

3675
500

89210
0

0

1057

0

1606

44
Corp. Ltd.
iii) National Hydro
Electric Power Corp.
Ltd.
iv) National Thermal
Power Corp. Ltd.
v) North Eastern
Electric Power Corp.
Ltd.
vi) Power Finance Corp.
Ltd.
vii) Power Grid Corp. of
India Ltd.
viii) Satluj Jal Vidyut
Nigam Ltd.
ix) Tehri Hydro
Development Corp.
Ltd.
Total
Ministry of Civil
Aviation (9)
Total
Department of
Telecommunicati
on (14)

Total
Ministry of
Defence (Misc)
(19)

Total
Ministry of
Railways (80)

Total
Department of
Atomic Energy (4)
Total

Airport Authority of
India
Defence Spectrum Optical Fibre Cable
based network for
Defence Services
Investment in CPE
(Bharat Broadband
Network Ltd.)
Works executed by
Border Roads
Development Board
Coast Guard
Organisation
Capital Outlay on
Indian Railways
Indian Railway Finance
Corporation
Nuclear Power
Corporation of India
Ltd.

350

3173

482

2258

0

28000

0

22300

1

1212

267

122

0

4000

0

0

0

25000

0

25000

0

609

0

935

32

1267

52

1248

883
150

64318
2543

1301
0

53469
4086

150
3755

2543
0

0
4500

4086
0

0

9786

0

16986

3755
2708

9786
0

4500
2785

16986
0

2200
4908
40000

2700
0
34900

5485
53060

45100

0
38500
54940

40000
1435

80000
7785

53060
1665

93440
5656

1435

7785

1665

5656

45
Ministry of
Housing And
Urban Affairs (56)

Total
Ministry of Road
Transport and
Highways (81)

MRTS and Metro
Projects

17810

1477

14924

1897

Housing And Urban
Develpoment
Corporation
PMAY (Urban)

0

13716

0

13040

6043
23853
23892

0
15193
59279

6500
21424
29663

25000
39937
62000

26967
50858
125

0
59279
0

29762
59425
250

0
62000
0

Investment in NHAI

Roads And Bridges
Total
Ministry of
Shipping (87)

Sagarmala
VoChidambaranar Port
Trust
Jawaharlal Nehru Port
Trust
Mumbai Port Trust
Deen Dayal Port Trust
Kandla
Kamarajar Port Trust
Cochin Shipyard
Limited

Total
Ministry of Steel
(93)

Total
Department of
Higher Education
(58)
Total

Ferro Scrap Nigam
limited
KIOCL
Manganese Ore India
Limited
MECON Limited
MSTC Limited
NMDC Limited
Rashtriya Ispat nigam
Limited
Steel Authority Of India
Limited
HEFA

163

342

1569

2065

410
347

432
458

325
351

250
495

125
0

3165
28

250
0

4042
23

0
0

2024
272

0
0

1782
279

0
0
0
0

5
33
3324
1570

0
0
0
0

5
49
3778
1400

0

4200

0

4000

0
250

11428
0

0
2750

11294
28000

250

0

2750

28000

46
Ministry of
Electronics &
Information
Technology
Total

Digital India

Grand Total

1426

3073

5700

1426

3073

5700

129554 364759
494313

157208 439935
597143

Annexure IV
(As referred in para 131)

E-office and E-governance initiatives in central Ministries and
Departments

1.

A web-based Government Integrated Financial Management
Information System (GIFMIS), administered by Controller
General of Accounts, for budgeting, accounting, expenditure
and cash management for more effective fiscal management
of Government.

2.

A Non Tax Receipt Portal (NTRP) to provide one stop services
for

depositing fees, fines and other non-tax dues into

Government account;
3.

Project „e-Vidhan‟ to digitize and make the functioning of all
State Legislatures paperless.

4.

A Central Public Procurement Portal to provide a single point
access for all information on procurement. Around 3.5 lakh
contractors and vendors are registered on this platform. In
November, 2017 alone, electronic bids for over one lakh
tenders valued at around two lakh forty thousand crore were
invited through this Portal.

47
5.

The

Government

E-Marketplace

procurement at the right

(GeM)

to

facilitate

price, in right quality and quantity in

a transparent and efficient manner. Third version of the GeM
platform (GeM 3.0) will be launched on 26th January, 2018.
The platform has seventy eight thousand buyers, fifty six
thousand sellers, three lakh seventy five thousand products
and twelve services. Besides facilitating transaction of the
value of `3000 crore in about two lakh transactions, it could
achieve savings of more than 25% over the base price.
6.

E-Courts, to bring about universal computerization of all
Districts and Subordinate Courts, use of cloud computing and
availability of e-services like e-filing and e-payments as well.

7.

A National Judicial Data Grid to provide an online platform for
information relating to judicial proceedings and decisions from
over sixteen thousand computerized Courts and Subordinate
Courts in the country. An e-Courts Services App has also been
launched to provide litigant centric services.

8.

e-Panchayats platform to provide a suite of core common
applications to address various aspects of panchayats
functioning from internal core functions of planning, budgeting,
implementation, accounting, monitoring and social audit to
delivery of services like issue of certificates, licenses etc.

Annexure V to Part B of Budget Speech

Other changes in Direct Taxes:

48
1.

It is proposed that the provision of section 79 of the Income-tax Act
(the Act) regarding restriction on shareholding for the purpose of
carry forward loss shall not apply in case of change of shareholding
pursuant to an approved resolution plan under IBC, 2016 where an
opportunity of being heard has been given to the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner.

2.

In respect of companies where an application under Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 2016 has been admitted, it is proposed to
provide that for the purpose of computation of Minimum Alternative
Tax (MAT) the aggregate amount of unabsorbed depreciation and
brought forward loss shall be allowed to be reduced from the book
profit.

3.

It is proposed to provide that the insolvency resolution professional
shall verify the return of income in case of a company where an
application under IBC, 2016 has been admitted.

4.

It is proposed to provide that provisions of MAT shall not apply in
respect of foreign companies having income solely from businesses
referred to in sections 44B, 44BB, 44BBA and 44BBB of the Act
provided such income has been offered to tax at the rates specified in
these sections.

5.

It is proposed to extend the benefit of exemption for withdrawal up to
40% from National Pension System Trust (NPS) to all subscribers and
not only to employees.

6.

It is proposed to provide that in a case where premium for health
insurance for multiple years has been paid in one year, the deduction
shall be allowed proportionately over the years for which the benefit
of health insurance is available.

7.

In order to encourage start-ups, the definition of ‘eligible business’ for
a start-up is proposed to be aligned with the modified definition
notified by DIPP. It is further proposed to extend the incorporation
date for a start-up for availing benefit under section 80-IAC of the Act
to 31st March, 2021 from 31st March, 2019 and rationalise the
condition of turnover for availing the benefit.

8.

It is proposed to rationalise the provisions of section 56(2)(x) of the
Act to provide that the receipt of any property by a wholly-owned
Indian subsidiary from its holding company and by an Indian holding
company from its subsidiary shall be exempt from tax.

49
9.

It is proposed to provide that trading in agricultural commodity
derivatives on a recognized stock exchange shall not be treated as a
speculative transaction even if no Commodities Transaction Tax (CTT)
has been paid in respect of those derivative transactions.

10.

Considering the strategic nature of the transactions, it is proposed to
provide that income arising to a non-resident from royalty or fees for
technical services received from National Technical Research
Organisation shall be exempt from tax.

11.

It is proposed to provide that the exemption of sale of leftover stock
of crude oil shall also apply in respect of termination of the contract or
arrangement in respect of a foreign company participating in a
strategic oil reserve.

12.

It is proposed to provide that in addition to notifying any authority,
Board, Trust or Commission under section 10(46) of the Act, the
Government can also notify any class of such persons.

13.

It is proposed to provide similar tax regime as available to equity
oriented funds to Fund of Funds investing only in exchange traded
funds which only invest in listed equity shares of domestic companies.

14.

It is proposed to provide that no adjustments shall be made under
section 143(1)(vi) of the Act while processing the return filed for the
assessment year 2018-2019 and subsequent assessment years.

15.

It is proposed to provide that no expenditure or allowance or set off of
any loss shall be allowed in respect of undisclosed income determined
by the Assessing Officer under section 115BBE of the Act.

16.

It is proposed to provide that every entity, not being an individual,
which enters into any financial transaction of an amount aggregating
to Rs.2.50 Lakh or more in a financial year shall be required to apply
for a permanent account number (PAN). It is also proposed that
directors, partners, principal officers, office bearer or any person
competent to act on behalf of such entities shall also apply for PAN.

17. In view of the proposed amendment in the Customs Act creating a new
custom Authority for Advance Ruling, it is proposed to provide that the
Authority for Advance Ruling constituted under the Income-tax Act shall
act as an Appellate Authority in respect of the rulings given by the
customs Authority for Advance Ruling. It is also proposed to provide

50
that when the authority is dealing with an application relating to
Income-tax Act, the revenue member shall be from income-tax.
18. It is proposed to make the order passed by the Commissioner of
Income-tax (Appeals) under section 271J of the Act appealable before
Appellate Tribunal.
19. It is proposed to enhance the penalty from `100/- to `500/- and from
`500/- to `1000/- under section 271FA of the Act.
20. It is proposed to provide that prosecution shall lie against companies for
non-filing of return irrespective of the fact that whether any tax is
payable or not.
21. It is proposed to mandate that in order to avail benefit of any deduction
under Chapter VIA-C, the persons have to file return within due date
specified under section 139(1) of the Act.
22. It is proposed to provide that if stock-in-trade is converted into capital
asset, the fair market value of the same on the date of conversion shall
be taken into account for computing business income.
23. It is proposed to rationalise the existing provision relating to investment
in capital gain bonds by providing that the exemption shall be available
only in respect of long-term capital gains arising out of sale of
immoveable property and investment in the bond shall be for a
minimum period of 5 year from the existing 3 years.
24. It is proposed to amend section 9 of the Act to align the scope of
"business connection" with the modified dependent agent permanent
establishment rule as per Multilateral Instrument signed by the
Government.
25. It is proposed to amend section 9 of the Act to provide that significant
economic presence of a non-resident shall constitute "business
connection" with India. It is also proposed to define the phrase
‘significant economic presence’.
26. It is proposed to provide that compensation received in connection with
termination or modification of business contract and employment
contract shall be taxable.

51
27. It is proposed to provide that in respect of heavy goods vehicles (more
than 12 tonnes), the presumptive income under section 44AE of the Act
shall be computed at the rate of `1000 per tonne per month.
28. In order to provide statutory backing and certainty to Income
Computation and Disclosure Standards (ICDS), it is proposed to amend
the provisions of Chapter IV-D of the Act relating to computation of
business income and Chapter XIV of the Act.
29. It is proposed to provide that TDS at the applicable rate shall be made in
respect of interest exceeding `10,000 from newly introduced 7.75% GOI
Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2018.
30. It is proposed to provide that in the case of an amalgamated company,
accumulated profits for the purpose of determining dividend shall also
include the accumulated profits of the amalgamating company on the
date of amalgamation.
31. It is proposed to provide that deemed dividend under section 2(22)(e) of
the Act shall be subject to dividend distribution tax at the rate of 30%
without grossing up.
32. It is proposed to provide that the concessional tax rate of 25% for new
domestic companies engaged in manufacturing shall be subject to the
special rates in respect of specified income provided under Chapter XII
of the Act.
33. It is proposed to rationalise the provisions relating to filing of Countryby-Country Report by providing the time-limits and the definition of
‘agreement’.
34. It is proposed to amend Finance Act, 2013 to rationalise levy of
Commodities Transaction Tax (CTT) on options in commodity futures.
35. It is proposed to amend the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income
and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 to rationalise the
designations of authorities competent to grant approval for penalty and
prosecution.

Annexure VI to Part B of Budget Speech

52
INDIRECT TAXES
1.

PROPOSALS INVOLVING CHANGE IN CUSTOMS DUTY RATES:
Chapter/
heading/
subheading/
Tariff item
I.

Commodity

Rate of Duty
From

To

Incentivizing domestic value addition, ‘Make in India’
A.

Reduction in Customs duty on inputs and raw materials to
reduce costs
Food processing

1

0801 31 00 Cashew nuts
cashew]

in

shell

[Raw

5%

2.5%

7.5%

2.5%

5%

Nil

Capital goods and Electronics
2

3

B.

8483 40 00, Ball screws, linear motion
8466 93 90, guides, CNC systems for
manufacture of all types of CNC
8537 10 00
machine tools falling under
headings 8456 to 8463
70

Solar tempered glass or solar
tempered [anti-reflective coated]
glass for manufacture of solar
cells /panels/modules

Changes in Customs duty to address the problem of duty
inversions in certain sectors
Medical Devices

4

Any
Chapter

Raw
materials,
parts
or
accessories for the manufacture
of Cochlear Implants

2.5%

Nil

C.

Changes in Customs duty to provide adequate protection to
domestic industry
Food Processing

5

2009 11 00

Orange fruit juice

30%

35%

Other fruit juices and vegetable
juices

30%

50%

Cranberry juice

10%

50%

2009 12 00
2009 19 00
6

2009 21 00
to
2009 90 00

7

2009 81 00,

53
2009 90 00
8

2106 90

Miscellaneous
Food
preparations (other than soya
protein)
Perfumes
and
preparations

30%

50%

toiletry

9

3303

Perfumes and toilet waters

10%

20%

10

3304

Beauty or make-up preparations
and preparations for the care of
the
skin
(other
than
medicaments),
including
sunscreen
or
suntan
preparations;
manicure
or
pedicure preparations

10%

20%

11

3305

Preparations for use on the hair

10%

20%

12

3306

Preparations for oral or dental
hygiene,
including
denture
fixative pastes and powders;
yarn used to clean between the
teeth (dental floss), in individual
retail packages

10%

20%

13

3307

Pre-shave, shaving or after-shave
preparations, personal deodorants,
bath preparations, depilatories and
other perfumery, cosmetic or toilet
preparations, not elsewhere specified
or
included,
prepared
room
deodorizers, whether or not perfumed
or having disinfectant properties

10%

20%

Specified parts/accessories of
motor vehicles, motor cars,
motor cycles

7.5% /
10%

15%

Automobile
parts
14

8407, 8408,
8409,
8483 10 91,
8483 10 92,

and

automobile

8511, 8708,
8714 10
15

8702, 8703,
8704, 8711

CKD imports of motor vehicle,
motor cars, motor cycles

10%

15%

16

8702, 8704

CBU imports of motor vehicles

20%

25%

17

4011 20 10

Truck and Bus radial tyres

10%

15%

Textiles

54
18

5007

Silk Fabrics

10%

20%

Footwear

10%

20%

Parts of footwear

10%

15%

Footwear
19

6401, 6402,
6403, 6404,
6405

20

6406

Diamonds, precious
and jewellery

stones

21

71

Cut and
gemstones

polished

colored

2.5%

5%

22

71

Diamonds including lab grown
diamonds-semi processed, halfcut or broken; non-industrial
diamonds including lab-grown
diamonds (other than rough
diamonds), including cut and
polished diamonds

2.5%

5%

23

7117

Imitation Jewellery

15%

20%

Cellular mobile phones

15%

20%

Specified parts and accessories
of cellular mobile phones

7.5%/
10%

15%

PCBA of charger/adapter and
moulded
plastics
of
charger/adapter
of
cellular
mobile phones

Nil

10%

Electronics / Hardware
24

8517 12

25

3919 90 90,
3920 99 99,
3926 90 91,
3926 90 99,
4016 99 90,
7318 15 00,
7326 90 99,
8504, 8506,
8507,
8517 70 90,
8518,
8538 90 00,
8544 19,
8544 42,
8544 49

26

8504 90 90/
3926 90 99

27

Any Chapter Inputs or parts for manufacture Applicable

Nil

55
of:

rate

a) PCBA, or
b) moulded plastics
of charger/adapter of cellular
mobile phones
28

8517 62 90

Smart watches/wearable devices

10%

20%

29

8529 10 99

LCD/LED/OLED panels and
other parts of LCD/LED/OLED
TVs

7.5%/
10%

15%

8529 90 90
30

8529/4016

12
specified
parts
for
manufacture of LCD/LED TV
panels

Nil

10%

31

70

Preform of silica for use in the
manufacture
of
telecommunication grade optical
fibres or optical fibre cables

Nil

5%

Furniture
32

9401

Seats and parts of seats [except
aircraft seats and parts thereof]

10%

20%

33

9403

Other furniture and parts

10%

20%

34

9404

Mattresses supports; articles of
bedding and similar furnishing

10%

20%

35

9405

Lamps and lighting fitting,
illuminated signs, illuminated
name plates and the like [except
solar lanterns or solar lamps]

10%

20%

Watches and Clocks
36

9101, 9102

Wrist watches, pocket watches
and other watches, including
stop watches

10%

20%

37

9103

Clocks with watch movements

10%

20%

38

9105

Other clocks, including alarm
clocks

10%

20%

Toys and Games
39

9503

Tricycles, scooters, pedal cars
and similar wheeled toys; dolls‟
carriages; dolls; other toys;
puzzles of all kinds

10%

20%

40

9504

Video game consoles and
machines, articles for funfair,

10%

20%

56
table or parlor games and
automatic
bowling
alley
equipment
41

9505

42

Festive,
carnival
or
entertainment articles

other

10%

20%

9506
[except
9506 91]

Articles and equipment for sports
or outdoor games, swimming
pools and paddling pools [other
than articles and equipment for
general
physical
exercise,
gymnastics or athletics]

10%

20%

43

9507

Fishing rods, fishing-hooks and
other line fishing tackle; fish
landing nets, butter fly nets and
similar nets; decoy birds and
similar hunting or shooting
requisites

10%

20%

44

9508

Roundabouts, swings, shooting
galleries and other fairground
amusements; travelling circuses,
traveling
menageries
and
travelling theatres

10%

20%

Candles, tapers and the like

10%

25%

Miscellaneous items
45

3406

46

4823 90 90

Kites

10%

20%

47

9004 10

Sunglasses

10%

20%

48

9611

Date, sealing or
stamps, and the like

numbering

10%

20%

49

9613

Cigarette lighters and other
lighters,
whether
or
not
mechanical or electrical, and
parts thereof other than flints
and wicks

10%

20%

50

9616

Scent sprays and similar toilet
sprays, and mounts and heads
therefor; powder-puffs and pads
for the application of cosmetic or
toilet preparations

10%

20%

12.5%

30%

Rationalization measures

II

Edible oils of vegetable origin
1

1508, 1509,
1510,1512,

Crude edible vegetable oils like
Ground nut oil, Olive oil, Cotton
seed oil, Safflower seed oil,

57

2

1513, 1515

Saffola oil, Coconut oil, Palm
Kernel/Babassu oil, Linseed oil,
Maize corn oil, Castor oil,
Sesame
oil,
other
fixed
vegetable fats and oils.

1508, 1509,

Refined edible vegetable oils,
like Ground nut oil, Olive oil,
Cotton seed oil, Safflower seed
oil, Saffola oil, Coconut oil, Palm
Kernel/Babassu oil, Linseed oil,
Maize corn oil, Castor oil,
Sesame
oil,
other
fixed
vegetable fats and oils, edible
margarine of vegetable origin,
Sal fat; specified goods of
heading 1518

1510,1512,
1513, 1515,
1516 20,
1517 10 21,
1517 90 10,
1518 00 11,
1518 00 21,

20%

35%

1518 00 31
Refractory Items
3

6815 91 00

Other articles of stone containing
magnesite, dolomite or chromite

10%

7.5%

4

6901

Bricks, blocks, tiles and other
ceramic goods of siliceous fossil
meals or of similar siliceous
earths

10%

7.5%

5

6902

Refractory bricks, blocks, tiles
and similar refractory ceramic
constructional goods, other than
those of siliceous fossil meals or
similar siliceous earths

5%

7.5%

6

6903

Other refractory ceramic goods

5%

7.5%

III

Social Welfare Surcharge
1

Any chapter

Levy
of
Social
Welfare
Surcharge on imported goods
[other than those mentioned at
S. No. 3 to 6 below] to finance
education, housing and social
security

--

10% of
the
aggregat
e duties
of
customs

2

Any chapter

Abolition of Education Cess and
Secondary
and
Higher
Education Cess on imported
goods

3% of the
aggregat
e duties
of
Customs

Nil

[2% + 1%]

58
3

2710

Exemption from Social Welfare
Surcharge on motor spirit
commonly known as petrol and
high speed diesel oil

--

3% of the
aggregat
e duties
of
Customs

4

7106

Silver (including silver plated
with
gold
or
platinum),
unwrought
or
in
semimanufactured form, or in powder
form

--

3% of
the
aggregat
e duties
of
Customs

5

7108

Gold (including gold plated with
platinum), unwrought or in semimanufactured form, or in powder
form

--

3% of the
aggregat
e duties
of
Customs

6

Any
Chapter

Specified goods hitherto exempt
from Education Cess and
Secondary
and
Higher
Education Cess on imported
goods

--

Nil

IV

Road and Infrastructure Cess
1

2710

Levy of Road and Infrastructure
Cess on imported motor spirit
commonly known as petrol and
high speed diesel oil

--

Rs. 8
per litre

2

2710

Exemption from additional duty
of customs leviable under
section 3(1) of the Customs
Tariff Act, 1975 in lieu of the
proposed
Road
and
Infrastructure
cess
on
domestically produced motor
spirit commonly known as petrol
and high speed diesel oil

--

Nil

3

2710

Abolition of Additional Duty of
Customs [Road Cess] on
imported motor spirit commonly
known as petrol and high speed
diesel oil

Rs. 6
per litre

Nil

4

Additional duty of customs under
sections 3(1) of the Customs
Tariff Act, 1975 in lieu of basic
excise duty

59

2.

2710

(i)

Motor
spirit
commonly
known as petrol

2710

(ii) High speed diesel oil

Rs. 6.48
per litre

Rs.
4.48
per litre

Rs. 8.33
per litre

Rs.
6.33
per litre

AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSTOMS TARIFF ACT, 1975 WITH NO
CHANGES IN EFFECTIVE RATES OF DUTIES

S. Amendment
No
.
A Amendment in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
1

Amendment to the section 3 so as to insert subsections 8A and 10A to
provide for valuation of warehoused goods, which are sold to another
person before clearance for home consumption or export, for the purposes
of Integrated Tax and Goods and Services Tax Compensation Cess

B Import duty – First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
1

The tariff rate of customs duty for the specified medical devices is being
increased from 7.5% to 10%. The effective rate of import duty on such
medical devices will, however, remain unchanged.

2

The tariff rate of customs duty for Lithium-ion batteries is being increased
from 10% to 20%. The effective rate of import duty on Lithium-ion batteries
[other than Lithium-ion batteries for cellular mobile phones] will, however,
remain unchanged at 10%.

C Export duty – Second Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
1

To insert a new Note to specify Nil rate of duty in respect of all other goods
which are not covered under column (2) of the Schedule.

2

Introduction of 20% Tariff rate of Export Duty on Electrodes of a kind used
for furnaces. The effective rate of Export duty on such electrodes will,
however, remain Nil.

3.

MAJOR AMENDMENTS IN THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
S. No

A.

Amendment
For facilitating trade

1

Defining scope of Assessment and introducing “risk based selection”

60
for verifying Self-Assessment [Section 2(2), 17 of Customs Act]
2

Establishing single point of reference for importers, exporters and
Officers with regard to Regulatory Controls imposed by various
Ministries, Departments and Agencies [Section 11 of Customs Act]

3

Facilitating imports and exports meant for Repair, Manufacture and
further Processing with full or partial duty exemptions [Section 25A
and Section 25B of Customs Act]

4

Appointing a new Customs Advance Ruling Authority with Appellate
mechanism [Sections 28E to 28M of Customs Act]

5

Providing legal basis for clearance by Customs Automated System
[Sections 45, 47, 51, 60, 68 and 69 of Customs Act]

6

Introducing an electronic Cash ledger on the lines similar to
provisions in CGST Act [Section 51A of Customs Act ]

7

Introducing a new chapter for conduct of Audit [Section 99A of
Customs Act ]

8

Inserting a new section to provide for simplified and different
procedures as part of Trade Facilitation [Section 143AA of Customs
Act]

9

Introducing a new section for exchange of information with competent
authorities of other countries [Section 151B of Customs Act]

B.

For reducing litigation
10

Providing for pre-notice consultation, issue of supplementary show
cause notices on receipt of additional information but within present
limitation period, time bound Adjudication and deemed closure of
cases [Section 28 of Customs Act]

11

Providing for closure of cases without imposition of redemption fine in
cases of voluntary payment of all dues [Section 125 of Customs Act]

C.

4.

For improving compliance
12

Expanding the scope of the Customs Act to any offence or
contravention committed under the said Act outside India [Section 1
of Customs Act]

13

Introducing provisions for controlled delivery for certain goods to be
notified [Section 109A of Customs Act]

PROPOSALS INVOLVING CHANGE IN EXCISE DUTY RATES:
Commodity

Rate of Duty
From

I

To

Motor spirit commonly known as petrol and high speed diesel oil
1.

Levy of Road and Infrastructure Cess on

--

Rs. 8 per

61
motor spirit commonly known as petrol and
high speed diesel oil
2.

Abolition of Additional Duty of Excise [Road
Cess] on motor spirit commonly known as
petrol and high speed diesel oil

3.

Basic excise duty on:

4.

litre
Rs. 6 per
litre

Nil

(i)

Unbranded Petrol

Rs. 6.48
per litre

Rs. 4.48
per litre

(ii)

Branded petrol

Rs. 7.66
per litre

Rs. 5.66
per litre

(iii)

Unbranded diesel

Rs. 8.33
per litre

Rs. 6.33
per litre

(iv)

Branded diesel

Rs. 10.69
per litre

Rs. 8.69
per litre

--

Nil

--

Rs. 4 per
litre

Infrastructure Cess on
(i) 5% ethanol blended petrol,
(ii) 10% ethanol blended petrol and
(iii) bio-diesel, up to 20% by volume,
subject to the condition that appropriate
excise duties have been paid on petrol or
diesel and appropriate GST has been paid
on ethanol or bio-diesel used for making
such blends

5.

Infrastructure Cess on petrol and diesel
manufactured in and cleared from 4
specified refineries located in the North-East

Note: “Basic Excise Duty” means the excise duty set forth in the First
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.
5.

MISCELLANEOUS

S. No.
A.

Amendment
Renaming of Central Board of Excise and Customs as the Central
Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs
Name of Central Board of Excise and Customs is being changed to
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs with consequential
amendments in the following Acts: i.

The Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963)

ii.

The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)

iii.

The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (12 of 2017)

62

