1

Budget

2001-2002

Speech

of

Shri Yashwant Sinha
Minister of Finance
28th February, 2001
PART A
Sir,
Sir, I rise to present the Budget for the year 2001-2002.
2.
I do so in all humility. The challenges we face this year are awesome, made
more so by the tragedy and devastation caused by the Gujarat earthquake. I hope I
shall get the understanding and support of the whole House in my endeavour to
meet these challenges.
ECONOMIC CONTEXT
3.
The Indian economy has continued to exhibit both growth and resilience
that have characterized its performance in the past few years. Overall economic
growth this year is expected to be about 6 per cent despite a series of unexpected
setbacks. We have had a second successive year of irregular monsoon resulting in
low agricultural growth. World petroleum prices have continued to stay at high levels
placing strains on the economy as a whole, and have led to a significant increase in
inflation over the past year. Fortunately, despite the increase in energy prices, the
prices of essential commodities, and of manufactured products as a whole, have
remained stable. Inflation, excluding energy, was around 4 per cent during the year.
The economy remained secure with record levels of foreign exchange reserves and
public food stocks. The creditable export performance recorded last year improved
further: exports grew by over 20 per cent in dollar terms in April-December 2000.
4.
It is now 10 years since economic reforms began in 1991. During this
period, the economy has grown at an average rate of 6.4 per cent per year since
1992-93 compared to the 5.8 per cent recorded in the 1980s. Poverty has fallen from
36 per cent in 1993-94 to 26 per cent or less now.
1

2

5.
While economic reforms have placed the country on a much more secure
and sustained growth path, we still have some serious concerns and cannot afford
to be complacent.
·

Agricultural reforms have been inadequate and our agriculture continues
to be subject to the vagaries of the monsoon.

·

Despite major industrial sector reforms, industrial
accelerated to the double-digit level as expected.

·

Inadequate fiscal adjustment has remained the most intractable problem
over the past decade.

growth

has

not

¨

Interest payments now constitute over 69 per cent of the Centre’s tax
revenues.

¨

Subsidies continue to increase to unaffordable levels and do not
necessarily reach the deserving beneficiaries.

¨

The pension liability of the Government is becoming onerous.

·

Public investment in infrastructure and social sectors is inadequate due to
falling total public sector savings.

·

Private investment is constrained due to high real interest rates and
inadequate
infrastructure.

BUDGET STRATEGY
6.
Thus, despite the many achievements of economic reforms over the past
decade, much remains to be done if we have to achieve our full potential. There is
urgent need to further deepen reforms to set the stage for higher growth over the
next decade. We have to intensify our effort in fiscal adjustment so that the generations
to come are not burdened by our borrowing excesses. The economy has achieved
significant acceleration in growth over the last 20 years. Our aspiration must be to
achieve still higher growth in the next 20 years.
7.
The broad strategy of the budget, therefore, with this objective of growth in
mind is to ensure:
·
Speeding up of agricultural sector reforms and better management of the
food economy.
·
Intensification of infrastructure investment, continued reform in the
financial sector and capital markets, and deepening of structural reforms
through removal of remaining tiresome controls constraining economic
activity.
·
Human development through better educational opportunities and
programmes of social security.
·
Stringent expenditure control of non-productive expenditure, rationalisation
of subsidies and improvement in the quality of Government expenditure.
·
Acceleration of the privatisation process and restructuring of public
enterprises.
·
Revenue enhancement through widening of the tax base and administration
of a fair and equitable tax regime.

3

AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
8.
As I have noted, reforms in the agriculture sector have been inadequate
and must be speeded up. The Government has already announced the first ever
National Policy in Agriculture.
9.
The provision of adequate credit flow is critical for agricultural production.
Total credit flow to agriculture through institutional channels of commercial banks,
cooperative banks and regional rural banks is estimated to have reached a level of
Rs 51,500 crore this year, an increase of about 15 per cent over last year. It is
expected to increase to Rs 64,000 crore in 2001-2002 representing an increase of 24
per cent. In order to ensure continued healthy growth of the agricultural sector, I
propose the following steps:
*

The operation of the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), set up
in 1995-96 with NABARD, has been very successful in upgrading rural
infrastructure with about 1,84,000 projects sanctioned so far. To help the
States, I have decided to reduce the interest rate charged by NABARD from
11.5 per cent to 10.5 per cent. The corpus of RIDF VII will be increased
from Rs 4500 crore to Rs 5000 crore next year.

*

The innovation of Kisan Credit Cards has proved to be very successful.
Since the year of its introduction in 1998-99, almost 110 lakh of KCCs
have been issued. I am asking our banks to accelerate this programme and
cover all eligible agricultural farmers within the next 3 years.

*

I am also asking the banks to provide a personal insurance package to the
KCC holders, as is often done with other credit cards, to cover them against
accidental death or permanent disability, upto maximum amount of Rs
50,000 and Rs 25,000 respectively. The premium burden will be shared by
the card issuing institutions.

*

NABARD and SIDBI were asked to link one lakh Self-Help Groups during
the current year. NABARD by itself is well poised to exceed this target by
the end of next month. I expect NABARD to link 1 lakh additional Self Help
Groups during 2001-02, which would help in providing access to credit to
an additional 20 lakh families. Share-croppers and tenant farmers will
also become eligible for this scheme and special attention will be given to
SC/ST groups. A micro finance development fund has also been set up in
NABARD with contribution of Rs 40 crore each by NABARD and RBI.

*

I had permitted NABARD to issue capital gains tax exemption bonds last
year. This has helped NABARD to mobilise more than Rs 1000 crore at
lower than normal interest rates thereby reducing its cost of funds. I propose
to continue with this tax exemption.

*

The resources from the Watershed Development Fund set up in NABARD
would be used to promote people’s participation and also enable water
users’ associations to implement, operate and maintain irrigation schemes.

10.
In 1999, I had announced a credit linked subsidy scheme for construction
of cold storages for perishable commodities. So far, NABARD and NCDC have provided
Rs 161 crore of credit for creation of additional capacity of 9.69 lakh tonnes. A

4

subsidy of Rs 78 crore for setting up these cold storages was provided during 20002001. I now propose to extend the coverage of this scheme to also cover rural godowns.
The subsidy to be provided by the Government would be suitably enhanced to take
care of increased coverage. The loans would carry an adequate long-term repayment
period and would enable individuals, cooperative societies and others to build godowns
by availing of loans from cooperative banks, commercial banks and RRBs.
11.
This scheme will enable small farmers to enhance their holding capacity in
order to sell their produce at remunerative prices. NABARD proposes to reduce its
rate of interest for funding the storage of crops, from 10 per cent to 8.5 per cent.
Small farmers will particularly benefit from this scheme by avoiding distress sales.
12.
With the diversification and modernisation of agricultural practices, there
is a need to augment support and extension services for agriculture. For this purpose,
a scheme for setting up Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centres by agricultural graduates
will be launched with the support of NABARD. These centres will provide a package
of soil and input testing facilities and other consultancy services, They will strengthen
transfer of technology and extension services and also provide self-employment
opportunities to technically trained persons. Loans on attractive terms for setting
up these centres will be provided by banks with refinance from NABARD.
13.
There is a significant potential of improving crop productivity in the Eastern
and North Eastern regions through crop diversification and adoption of improved
technologies. These regions also have large untapped ground water resources. A
sum of Rs 61 crore has been provided for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on “OnFarm Water Management for Increasing Crop Production in Eastern India”.
14.
I am also happy to inform the House that I have provided Rs 38 crore for
the “Technology Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture in the NorthEastern States”, announced by me last year.
Rural Roads
15.
In my last Budget, I had announced the launching of a new scheme, the
Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya Yojana (PMGY) with the objective of undertaking time
bound programmes to fulfill the critical needs of the rural people. As a follow up,
particularly with the objective of achieving rural connectivity, the Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana has been launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on December
25, 2000. A Central allocation of Rs 2500 crore was provided for 2000-01. I am
providing another allocation of Rs 2500 crore for the coming year. 50 per cent of the
diesel cess is earmarked for development of rural roads.
Rural Electrification
16.
It is a matter of concern that even after 50 years of planned development
there are still about 80,000 villages, which do not have access to electricity. A package
of initiatives is therefore being launched to improve the power distribution system in
rural areas. This includes:
*
Completion of electrification of bulk of the remaining villages in the next 6
years.
*

Extension of assistance to the States for village electrification works under
the PMGY whose funding is being augmented.

5

*

Stepping up credit support from Rural Electrification Corporation to SEBs
for speedy electrification of dalit bastis, households of scheduled tribes
and other weaker sections of society.

*

Improving the quality of power supply in villages, augmentation of
distribution networks in rural areas supported by REC under the Accelerated
Power Development Programme.

*

Earmarking a sum of at least Rs 750 crore out of RIDF for rural electrification
works.

*

Augmenting the resources of REC, by allowing it to float capital gains tax
exemption bonds along with NABARD and NHAI under Section 54 EC of
the Income Tax Act.

Management of the Food Economy
17.
Increased production and rising productivity makes the proper management
of the food economy more critical then ever before. Our policy has to be transformed
to deal with surpluses rather than only shortages. The present arrangement of
Government of India procuring foodgrains and States managing the PDS has led to
many problems. While the subsidy has increased from Rs 8210 crore at B.E. to Rs
12,125 crore at R.E. stage this year, the satisfaction level has gone down. I propose,
therefore, to give an enlarged role to the State Governments in both procurement
and distribution of foodgrains for PDS in their respective states. Instead of providing
subsidised foodgrains, financial assistance will be provided to the State Governments
to enable them to procure and distribute foodgrains to BPL families at subsidised
rates. FCI will continue to procure foodgrains for maintaining food security reserves
and for such State Governments who will assign it this task on their behalf. Details
for operationalising these arrangements will be worked out in consultation with the
State Governments at the earliest.
18.
The agricultural sector continues to be constrained by the existence of a
number of inhibiting controls and regulations. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955
provides for the control of production, supply and distribution of certain commodities
identified as essential commodities under the Act to protect the interest of consumers.
State Governments have issued a large number of Control Orders under this Act
inhibiting free movement of some food and agriculture products. In the changed
present situation undue restrictions on movement and stocking of foodgrains and
agricultural produce is acting as a disincentive to farmers.
19.
Government therefore proposes to review the operation of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955 and remove many of the restrictions that have been imposed
on the free inter-State movement of foodgrains and agricultural produce and also on
the storage and stocking of such commodities. It will also review the list of commodities
declared as essential under the said Act and bring their number down to the minimum
required. My colleague the Food Minister will issue necessary directions in this regard
after consultations with the State Governments.
INFRASTRUCTURE
20.
Rapid development of the economy depends on adequate investment in
infrastructure. A key issue here is imposition of appropriate user charges necessary

6

to provide adequate returns on investment. Public resources have been invested in
the public sector over the last 50 years for the provision of infrastructure services in
the country. One consequence of this has been that user charges have inevitably
become politically determined. Over time non-merit subsidies inherent in such low
user charges have mounted to over 10 per cent of GDP, a figure similar to the total
fiscal deficit of the Central and State Governments combined. Hence they are a
major cause of the fiscal distress being experienced at all levels.
21.
I believe that this issue is now so important that it needs urgent discussion
throughout the country. The challenge is to achieve a consensus on the imposition
of appropriate user charges in such a manner that the poor are protected while
those who can pay are made to do so. Only then will we be able to accelerate investment
in these essential services in both the public and private sectors. A prime example of
this is the power sector.
Power
22.
The importance of power in fuelling economic growth cannot be over
emphasised. The total cost to the State Electricity Boards of implicit subsidies amounts
to about Rs 36,000 crore this year. After accounting for cross subsidy and State
subventions, actual commercial losses of all SEBs combined are estimated to be
about Rs 24,000 crore. Hidden in these loss figures are extremely high T&D losses.
23
Although all of these losses are borne by SEBs and State Governments, I
have to express my concern on this issue since this is a massive national loss and
affects Central Government undertakings also. The total dues owed to Central
Government utilities by SEBs and others now amount to over Rs 25,000 crore. If
these resources were available, the country would have no difficulty in investing
adequately in power sector expansion to the benefit of all. Theft of electricity must be
stopped and economic tariffs levied.
24.
The most vital element of the reform process is the restoration of financial
viability of the State Electricity Boards (SEBs). On the basis of consensus that has
progressively emerged in the National Development Council Resolution of 1992, the
Common Minimum National Action Programme drawn up in 1996 and the Power
Ministers’ Conference of February 2000, the Central Government is accelerating the
programme of reforms in SEBs on the basis of specific milestones that are being
built into MOUs entered into with State Governments. These MOUs include specific
milestones such as:
·

A time bound programme for installation of 100 per cent metering by
December 2001.

·

Energy audit at all levels.

·

A specific programme for reduction and eventual elimination of power theft.

·

Tariff determination by SERCs and compliance thereof.

·

Commercialisation of distribution and

·

SEB

restructuring.

To demonstrate the importance of this task, the Prime Minister will hold a meeting
of State Chief Ministers on March 3, 2001.

7

25.
MOUs have already been entered into with 5 States and we expect more
States to adopt the reform process. Accordingly, plan allocation to the Accelerated
Power Development Programme (APDP) has been stepped up to Rs 1500 crore next
year from a level of Rs 1000 crore this year. Priority under APDP would be given to
those states that undertake such reform. The key to restoration of financial viability
is reform of distribution. Assistance from the Fiscal Reform
Incentive Fund
th
recommended by the 11 Finance Commission would also, inter-alia, be linked to
the achievement of power reforms. The reforming States would also receive support
from the Central Government in form of preferential allocation of power to SEBs
from CPSUs, additional investment by CPSUs in generation and transmission, and
preferential allocation of external aid.
26.
In order to help accelerate the reform process in the power sector and to
unify all existing central legislations in the sector, my colleague the Minister for
Power will introduce the Electricity Bill 2001 within this session.
27.
The Plan outlay for central sector power utilities is being raised from Rs
9,194 crore this year to Rs 10,030 crore for 2001-02. This demonstrates the
commitment of the Central Government to accelerate public sector power investment
along with power sector reforms.
Roads
28.
The National Highway Development Programme (NHDP) represents a new
road vision for this country. Its unprecedented scale is symbolic of government’s
earnestness to provide connectivity and mobility of an altogether different order. The
key to government’s success in accelerating the road development programme lies
in its bold policy of levying a cess on petrol and diesel as a user charge for road
usage. Resources for Phase I, to be completed by December 2003, have already been
tied up. Work has already been awarded for more than 1500 Kms. of the golden
quadrilateral in addition to the completed sections totalling 600 Kms. The balance
portion is expected to be awarded by the middle of this year.
29.
The cess has paved the way for integrated road development in the country,
including village roads, district roads, state roads, and national highways. Rs 962
crore from the cess fund is being made available to States for state roads. The total
plan outlay for this sector is being enhanced by 93 per cent to Rs 8727 crore in
2001-02.
Te l e c o m
30.
Another area of success is in the telecommunications sector. Almost all the
policy measures announced in the New Telecom Policy 1999 regarding basic and
cellular services, national long distance, Internet services, and corporatisation of
Department of Telecom Services have been implemented. Competition is being
introduced in all service segments.
31.
By March 2001, overall teledensity is expected to reach 3.5 per hundred,
about double the teledensity of only two years ago. Moreover, the new competition
has already reduced prices for consumers. There are now almost 800,000 STD/
ISD/Local booths around the country bringing telephone service within reach of
almost all consumers, apart from generating considerable employment.

8

32.
Looking ahead, having recognised the imperatives of technological change
in this area, the Government proposes to introduce the Convergence Bill to cover
telecommunications, information technology, and information and broadcasting
sectors in an integrated manner.
Ports
33.
Coming to the port sector, I am glad to report that policy initiatives designed
to increase private sector participation in ports have also been successfully
implemented. Overall, capacity in Indian major ports is expected to go up to 314
million tonnes this year and further to 376 million tonnes by the end of 2001-2002,
along with substantial capacity addition in minor ports. There is now adequate capacity
in major ports. Ships no longer have to wait for berths as was the case before.
34.
Ennore port has already been corporatised and Jawahar Lal Nehru Port in
New Mumbai is next, and with experience, other major ports can also be corporatized,
enabling them to raise resources in the market. Successful investment is being enabled
by the setting of economic tariff levels. With the formation of the Tariff Authority for
Major Ports, these tariffs are being rationalised further on a continuing transparent
and fair basis.
FINANCIAL SECTOR AND CAPITAL MARKETS
35.
A great deal of progress has been made over the last few years in pursuing
reforms in the financial sector and capital markets. I propose to continue reform in
this sector.
Debt Market
36.
The Indian equity market is the oldest in Asia. Since the creation of SEBI
much greater transparency as well as automaticity has been introduced in the working
of the equity market. The need now is to develop and deepen the debt market. This
will be of great benefit to small investors and institutional investors alike. The
infrastructure sector will be enabled to raise long term funds, particularly with the
opening of the insurance sector.
37.
In order to further develop a transparent and active debt market in general,
and the Government securities market in particular, I propose to take the following
measures:
•

•
•

•

A Clearing Corporation will be set up under the active encouragement of
the RBI, with State Bank of India as the chief promoter, and is expected to
be in place by June 2001. It will also enable settlement of forex transactions.
Trading of Government Securities, through order driven screen-based
system will be implemented.
An electronic Negotiated Dealing System will be set up by the RBI by June
2001 to facilitate transparent electronic bidding in auctions and dealings
in Government securities on a real time basis.
In order to ensure smooth and quick movement of funds, the Electronic
Fund Transfer (EFT) and Real Time Gross Settlement Systems (RTGS) are
being put in place by the Reserve Bank of India within the next year.

9

•
•
•

Clarifications are being issued by CBDT to promote the issuance of STRIPS,
zero coupon bonds, deep discount bonds, and the like.
The old Public Debt Act will be replaced by Government Securities Act.
Comprehensive legislation will be introduced on securitization.

38.
I propose to set up a small group comprising the Reserve Bank of India,
SEBI, the stock exchanges and Ministry of Finance to monitor and implement these
developments so that the debt market becomes active next year.
Banking Sector
39.
Banking sector reforms have proceeded apace in a phased manner over the
past decade. However, the problem of non-performing assets with banks has
continued. Special attention is being paid to recovery of NPAs:
•

Public Sector Banks have recovered Rs 800 crore of NPAs from 2 lakh
accounts in 2000-01.

•

Net NPAs as percentage of net advances were almost half
7.4 per cent in 1999-2000 compared to 14.5 per cent in 1993-94.

•

22 Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) and 5 Appellate Tribunals have been
established.

•

7 more DRTs will be set up during 2001-02.

at

40.
I also propose to bring in a legislation that will facilitate foreclosure and
enforcement of securities in cases of default in order to enable the intitutions to
realise their dues.
41.
In the light of new competition in the banking industry it is necessary to
strengthen the management of the public sector banks. I propose to provide greater
autonomy to bank managements. It is also essential to provide greater independence
to bank managements in forming their own recruitment strategy and in implementing
it. I therefore propose to abolish the Banking Services Recruitment Boards. This will
be done in association with the Reserve Bank of India by July 31, 2001 or earlier. All
future recruitments will be done by banks themselves.
Capital Account Liberalisation
42.
Until about 10 years ago, all foreign exchange transactions were tightly
controlled by the government and by the RBI. We have progressively loosened these
controls and made the current account completely convertible. We have also liberalised
the capital account for certain purposes. I propose to take further measures for
liberalising the capital account. These are:
•
Indian companies wishing to invest abroad may now invest up to US $50
million on an annual basis through the automatic route without being
subject to the three year profitability condition.
•
Companies which have issued ADRs/GDRs may henceforth make foreign
investments up to 100 per cent of these proceeds; up from the current
ceiling of 50 per cent.
·
Companies with proven track record wishing to invest larger amounts may
now get a block allocation in advance from the RBI for investments overseas.

10

•

Indian companies that have issued ADRs/GDRs may acquire shares of
foreign companies up to an amount of US $100 million or an amount
equivalent to ten times of their exports in a year, whichever is higher.

•

ADRs/GDRs will be provided two-way fungibility. Converted local shares
may be reconverted to ADRs/GDRs while being subject to sectoral caps,
wherever applicable.

•

Indian companies will now be permitted to list in foreign stock exchanges
by sponsoring ADR/GDR issues against block share holding. This facility
would have to be offered to all categories of shareholders.

The Reserve Bank of India will be issuing these guidelines separately.
43.
Investments by Registered partnership firms and companies providing
professional services have not, so far, been permitted to make overseas investments.
This ban is now being removed. Similarly, Indian employees who have the benefit of
ESOP schemes in foreign owned companies can now make investments abroad up
to US $20,000 annually instead of in a block of 5 years.
Foreign

Investment

44.
Progressive liberalization has taken place in the provisions relating to foreign
investment. I propose to take the following further measures:
•

Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) can invest in a company under the
portfolio investment route up to 24 per cent of the paid up capital of the
company. This can be increased to 40 per cent with the approval of the
General Body of the shareholders by a special resolution. I propose to
increase this limit to 49 per cent.

•

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Non-Banking Financial Companies
(NBFCs) is permitted on a case by case basis upto 100 per cent but with a
condition that a minimum of 25 per cent of their holding is divested in the
domestic market. This condition is being removed, provided the foreign
investors bring in a minimum of US $50 million. FDI in NBFCs will now be
put on the automatic route subject to RBI guidelines.

STRUCTURAL REFORMS
45.
In order to accelerate growth in the Indian economy, we have now to address
some of the difficult areas of reform that have not been tackled so far.
46.
There are four significant areas where a price and distribution control regime
exists. These are the areas of petroleum, fertilizer, sugar and drugs.
Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM)
P e t ro l e u m
47.
As Hon’ble Members are aware, Government had, in November 1997, notified
the details of dismantling of the Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM) in the
petroleum sector by March 2002. I propose to adhere to this deadline. A time bound
action programme is being prepared for the deregulation of APM by March, 2002.
My colleague the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas will be outlining the road
map for this separately.

11

Fertilizer
48.
Hon’ble Members will recall that I have in the past referred to the
rationalisation of fertilizer pricing with the objective of phasing out the existing
retention price scheme (RPS) in the medium-term. Government has now decided to
implement the recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms Commission for a
phased programme of complete decontrol of urea by April 1, 2006. The following
steps would be taken in the first phase commencing from April 1, 2001:
•

The unit specific RPS will be replaced by a Group Concession Scheme. The
current MRP arrangement will be continued and the concession for each
group calibrated to enable the units to sell urea at the stipulated MRP.

•

The rate of concession for urea units based on naphtha/FO/LSHS will be
linked to international prices of these feed stocks.

Sugar
49.
Government is committed to complete decontrol of sugar. But this must be
irreversible. Government has decided to introduce futures/forward trading in sugar
within the coming year, a step that is necessary before full decontrol. Sugar under
the Public Distribution System will continue to be supplied to ration cardholders in
the special category states, hill states, island territories and to BPL families in other
states and UTs. Such supplies can even continue after sugar is completely
decontrolled. The retail issue price of sugar under the PDS is being revised to
Rs 13.25 per kg. with effect from March 1, 2001.
Drug Price Control
50.
The domestic drugs and pharmaceutical industry needs support in order
to meet the challenges and to avail of the opportunities arising out of liberalisation of
our economy and the impending advent of the product patent regime. Government
has been considering measures to lessen the rigours of the present price control
mechanism where they have become counter productive. Towards this end, we have
decided that the span of price control will be reduced substantially. However, keeping
in view the interest of the weaker sections of society, Government will retain the
power to intervene comprehensively in cases where prices behave abnormally.
Changes in the Pharmaceutical Policy are being made accordingly.
Industrial

Restructuring

51.
Government had constituted a high level committee on law relating to revival,
reconstruction and/or winding up of companies. The Committee has submitted its
report and Government has accepted its key recommendations. It is proposed to
repeal the SICA and also to amend the Companies Act in order to set up a National
Company Law Tribunal. These legislative proposals are proposed to be introduced
during the current session by my colleague, the Minister for Law, Justice and
Company Affairs.
Labour Market
52.
Along with these changes, it is also necessary to address the contentious
issue of rigidities in our labour legislations. Some existing provisions in the Industrial
Disputes Act have made it almost impossible for industrial firms to exercise any

12

labour flexibility. The Government is now convinced that some change is necessary
in this legislation. Chapter VB of the ID Act stipulates that employers in specified
industrial establishments must obtain prior approval of the appropriate government
authority for effecting lay-off, retrenchment and closure, after following the prescribed
procedure. It is proposed that these provisions may now apply to industrial
establishments employing not less than 1000 workers instead of 100. The separation
compensation will be increased from 15 days to 45 days for every completed year of
service. The enhancement of compensation would act as a deterrent on employers to
take recourse to lay-off, retrenchment and closure in a routine manner.
53.
Similarly, rigidities inherent in the existing legislation regarding Contract
Labour inhibit growth in employment in many service activities. Section 10 of the
existing Act envisages prohibition of contract labour in work/process/operation if
the conditions set therein like perennial nature of job etc. are fulfilled. Section 10
enables the contract labour engaged in prohibited jobs to become direct employees
of the principal employer. To overcome this difficulty and at the same time ensure
the protection of labour, it is proposed to bring an amendment to facilitate outsourcing
of activities without any restrictions as well as to offer contract appointments. It
would not differentiate between core and non-core activities, and provide protection
to labour engaged in outsourced activities in terms of their health, safety, welfare,
social security, etc. It would also provide for larger compensation based on last
drawn wages as retrenchment compensation for every year of service.
54.
These measures will promote industrial investment in labour intensive,
and export oriented activities providing for renewed industrial growth, while, at the
same time safeguarding the interest of workers. My colleague, the Minister for Labour
will introduce appropriate legislation to amend the Industrial Disputes Act and
Contract Labour Act within this session.
Ashraya Bima Yojana
55.
I am conscious of the short-term impact on organized labour force of the ongoing liberalization of the economy. I therefore propose to introduce a new scheme of
group insurance viz. “Ashraya Bima Yojana” to extend security cover to such affected
workers. The policy will provide compensation of up to 30 per cent of last drawn
annual pay for a period of one year to workers who lose their jobs. It is proposed that
the policy will initially cover all employees drawing a salary up to Rs 10,000 per
month. The four Government owned general insurance companies will administer
this policy on a “No Profit No Loss” basis and will announce full details including
premium rates of the proposed policy by the end of June 2001.
Small Scale Industries
56.
Government’s commitment to the Small Scale sector has been repeatedly
demonstrated. A comprehensive policy package for this sector was announced by
the Prime Minister on 30, August, 2000.
57.
In order to encourage production and employment in this sector, the
exemption limit has been doubled to Rs 1 crore from September 1, 2000.
58.
The new Credit Guarantee Scheme of August 2000 has been provided
budgetary support of Rs 100 crore in the current year. The limit of loan without

13

collateral which was earlier fixed at Rs 10 lakh has been raised to Rs 25 lakh under
this scheme. Already 7 banks have entered into an agreement with the Credit
Guarantee Fund Trust that has been created to implement the scheme. A credit
linked capital subsidy scheme for technology upgradation was launched in October
2000 envisaging 12 per cent capital subsidy. It is expected that loans to the extent of
Rs 5000 crore would be made available to the SSI sector over the next 5 years under
the scheme.
59.
Our small-scale entrepreneurs have proved their competitiveness in
providing over 35 per cent of national exports. To enable further new investment
and technology upgradation in some of the key export oriented sectors, it is now
proposed to dereserve another 14 items related to leather goods, shoes and toys.
Te x t i l e s
60.
The Government has recently announced a New Textile Policy aimed at
preparing industry for the new challenges of global competition. I am happy to
announce a textile package comprising the following schemes:
•

A scheme for setting up Integrated Apparel Parks is being initiated. This
will enable the dereserved readymade garment industry to set up modern
units with the best infrastructure. A budget provision of Rs 10 crore has
been provided for the year 2001-02.

•

A strong and modern weaving sector is very critical for this purpose. At
least 50,000 new shuttleless looms and the modernisation of 2.5 lakh plain
looms to automatic looms is expected to take place by 2004 through funding
from the Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS). The budget
provision under TUFS is being raised from Rs 50 crore this year to Rs 200
crore in the next year.

•

The Cotton Technology Mission is being continued and strengthened. The
budget provision is being increased from Rs 15 crore to Rs 25 crore.

•

The budget allocation for Ministry of Textiles is being enhanced
substantially from Rs 457 crore in 2000-01 to Rs 650 crore in 200102.

•

I shall provide the details of the proposed fiscal changes in Part B of my
speech.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Health and Family Welfare
61.
Recognizing the need for increasing investments in social sectors, the Plan
allocation for the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been stepped up from Rs
4920 crore to Rs 5780 crore. This includes an allocation of Rs 180 crore for HIV/
Aids Control Programme.
Indian System of Medicine
62.
There is now a great interest worldwide in herbal products as people look
for gentler forms of treatment devoid of side effects. We are establishing a Traditional
Knowledge Digital Liberary to bring the knowledge already in the public domain in

14

international languages to prevent the grant of patents. We are also introducing a
new scheme for strengthening the State Drug Testing Laboratories and pharmacies.
We propose to provide Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy benefits similar
to the pharmaceutical industry.
Education
63.
An integrated National Education Programme – the Sarva Siksha Abhiyan
has been launched for universalising elementary education and a National Mission
constituted with the Prime Minister as Chairman. The programme aims to provide
eight years of quality elementary education for all children upto the age of 14 years
in a Mission mode with a thrust on community ownership, disadvantaged group and
girls’ quality education and alternative modes of education. All existing schemes on
elementary education will converge with this scheme after the Ninth Plan and it will
cover all districts in the country by March, next year.
64.
We are determined to maintain and strengthen our competitiveness in the
field of technology education. A task force set up for this purpose under the HRD
Minister has made wide ranging recommendations to upgrade and expand this area
of education, The Roorkee Engineering College will be upgraded in to an IIT and
funding for IIT, Guwahati has been stepped up to ensure its early completion. The
base of IITs is to be expanded, regional engineering colleges are to be strengthened
and new institutes will be set up with public private partnership. The role of the
private sector will be encouraged. A new Centrally Sponsored Scheme for computer
literacy and studies in schools is being launched and other initiatives planned for
encouraging IT education from school to college levels.
65.
Last year, I announced the availability of 100 per cent deduction from income
tax of payments made to institutions for vocational education and training by the
private sector set up in rural areas and small towns. I propose to make the same
deduction available for payments to engineering institutions also.
Educational Loans for Students
66.
Mr Speaker Sir, I have personally experienced poverty and faced problems
in pursuing higher studies. I, therefore, feel that no deserving student in the country
should be deprived of higher and technical education for want of finances. I am glad
that the Indian Banks Association (IBA) has formulated a new comprehensive
Educational Loan Scheme, which will cover all courses in schools and colleges in
India and abroad. Loans will be available under this scheme up to Rs 7.5 lakh for
studies in India, and Rs 15 lakh for studies abroad. No collateral or margin will be
stipulated for loans up to Rs 4 lakh, the interest of which will not exceed the prime
lending rate (PLR). The interest rate will not exceed PLR plus 1 per cent for loans
above Rs 4 lakh. The loans would be repaid over a period of 5 to 7 years with provision
of a grace period. I hope that this scheme will enable needy children to pursue
higher and technical studies both inside and outside India.
Wo m e n
67.
The year 2001 is being observed as Women’s Empowerment Year. My
colleague, the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission is heading a Task
Force to review the programmes for women. Meanwhile I propose to:

15

•

Strengthen the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh for providing micro credit to poor
assetless women through NGOs.

•

Launch an integrated scheme for women’s empowerment in 650 blocks
through women’s self help groups.

•

Start a new scheme for women in difficult circumstances like widows of
Vrindavan, Kashi and other places, destitute women and other
disadvantaged women groups.

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
68.
In keeping with Government’s commitment to improve the Welfare of the
scheduled tribes, a separate National Scheduled Tribes Finance & Development
Corporation with an authorised share capital of Rs 500 crore has been set up. The
allocation for the schemes for welfare of scheduled tribes in the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs has been enhanced from Rs 786 crore this year to Rs 986 crore in the coming
y e a r.
69.
Similarly, the allocation for the schemes for welfare and upliftment of
scheduled castes in the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment has been enhanced
from Rs 709 crore this year to Rs 790 crore in the coming year.
Social Security
70.
Hon’ble Members may recall my announcement in the last budget, of a
new Group Insurance Scheme, the “Janashree Bima Yojana” to extend Social Security
cover to the poorest sections of society. The said scheme was launched by the Prime
Minister on 10, August, 2000 and has been well received. 332 schemes have been
approved so far covering 99,750 people in the BPL segment.
71.
I believe that the Social Security cover needs to be widened to minimize the
miseries of our people below the poverty line. Accordingly, I propose to introduce two
more schemes during the next financial year:
(i)

A special scheme for landless agricultural labourers, the Khetihar Mazdoor
Bima Yojana, which will provide benefits of insurance cover as available
under Janashree Bima Yojana and a pension of Rs 100 per month, to the
beneficiary on attaining the age of 60 years. In the case of beneficiaries
who join the scheme at a young age, some periodical payments at the end
of every ten years are also envisaged. The beneficiaries will be required to
make a small contribution towards the premium.

(ii)

A Shiksha Sahyog Yojana, to provide an education allowance of Rs 100
per month to the children of parents living below the poverty line, to meet
the expenses of education during their studies from 9 th to 12 th standard, so
that a needy student is not deprived of the opportunity to continue his/her
education for want of funds. This will be available to subscribers of the
Janashree Bima Yojana.

These schemes will be managed by LIC.
72.
Meanwhile, I have some good news for workers. The wage ceiling for coverage
under the EPF and MP Act, 1952 has been enhanced from Rs 5000 to Rs 6500.

16

To promote the welfare of employees I propose to enhance the ceiling for Government
contribution of 1.16 per cent of monthly wage of employees to the Pension Fund
from Rs 5000 to Rs 6000 per month. The extra expenditure on this account is
estimated to be Rs 77 crore per annum.
73.
Whereas the organised sector is at present covered by various pension,
provident fund and gratuity schemes, the unorganised sector does not have adequate
social security coverage. I am asking the Insurance Regulatory Development
Authority to look into all these issues and provide a road map for pension reforms
by October 1, 2001.
Journalists Welfare Fund
74.
Journalists have to increasingly take greater risks in covering terrorist
and other violence prone incidents. As an acknowledgement of their services and
sacrifices, and with the expectation of a better treatment at their hands, I propose
to set up a Journalists Welfare Fund with a contribution of Rs 1 crore under the
grants of Ministry of I&B. My colleague the I&B Minister will announce the details
of the scheme.
Entertainment
75.
Our entertainment industry, particularly the film industry not only provides
the much needed fantasy to millions of our people who live in an otherwise harsh
and cruel world, it has also emerged as an important segment of our economy and
holds great promise for the future. Two years ago, I provided for this industry the
same tax exemption that was available for merchandise exports. A few months ago,
the Government issued a notification under the IDBI Act whereby entertainment
industry including films has been declared as an industrial concern. Banks are in
the process of finalising guidelines for financing such projects that are bankable. I
hope that the film industry will take full advantage of these measures to bring about
a greater degree of professionalism and transparency in its operations, and will not
do things chupke chupke and certainly not chori chori.
FISCAL CONSOLIDATION
76.
As I have already stated the most serious problem confronting the economy
is the poor state of the fiscal health of both the Central and State Governments. The
combined fiscal deficit of the two together is in the region of 10 per cent of GDP. I
have often been described as a fiscal fundamentalist. Some have gone to the extent
of calling me a fiscal terrorist. Why am I so concerned about the fiscal deficit? Let me
try to explain. The total receipts of the Central Government in the current year
according to BE are about Rs 281,000 crore. Of this amount, Rs 72,000 crore is
States’ share of the Central taxes and grants. The Central Government is, therefore,
left with Rs 209,000 crore. On the expenditure side, about Rs 101,000 crore was to
be spent on interest, Rs 59,000 crore on defence, Rs 23,000 crore on major subsidies
and Rs 16,000 crore on pensions. The net amount left for meeting all other
Government expenditure totalling Rs 123,000 crore was, therefore, only Rs 12,000
crore. I have, therefore, to borrow Rs 111,000 crore in the current year to make both
ends meet. The most worrisome aspect is that over 70 per cent of my borrowing, i.e.,
Rs 77,000 crore was for financing unproductive revenue expenditure. This will add

17

to my interest burden next year forcing me to borrow more and ultimately fall into a
debt trap. I am deeply conscious of the burden which is being placed on future
generations, by our extravagance. I cannot allow this situation to continue.
77.
As promised in my earlier Budget Speeches, I appointed the Expenditure
Reforms Commission last year and introduced the Fiscal Responsibility Bill in this
House in the last session. The bill seeks to reduce the fiscal deficit to 2 per cent and
completely eliminate the revenue deficit over the next five years.
78.
A number of initiatives have already been taken to contain, in particular,
the growth of non-plan expenditure. I have not allowed any increase in non-plan
expenditure this year. Consequently, for the first time in many years, the fiscal deficit
target fixed in the budget has indeed been achieved, and remains at 5.1 per cent in
the RE of the current year. The target of 3.6 per cent revenue deficit has also been
achieved.
Expenditure Management
79.
I intend to carry forward the process of bringing about structural changes
in the composition of Central Government expenditure and effect economy in nonplan revenue expenditure with greater vigour while improving the quality of plan
expenditure. For this, I propose to take the following initiatives:
•

User charges for services provided by government and its agencies will be
revised keeping in view the increased cost of these services. A portion of
this increase will be provided to enhance the maintenance and quality of
these services.

•

Similarly, postal rates will be revised moderately to contain the rising postal
deficit.

•

All requirements of recruitment will be scrutinized to ensure that fresh
recruitment is limited to 1 per cent of total civilian staff strength. As about
3 per cent of staff retire every year, this will reduce the manpower by 2 per
cent per annum, achieving a reduction of10 per cent in five years as
announced by the Prime Minister.

•

The Surplus Pool under the Department of Personnel will be streamlined
and equipped to redeploy and retrain surplus staff. Employees in the Surplus
Pool will also be offered an attractive VRS package.

•

Standard licence fee (rent) on government accommodation will be enhanced
by 50 per cent for Group A, 25 per cent for Group B and 15 per cent for
other categories of staff with effect from April 1, 2001.

•

Facility of LTC to Central Government employees will be suspended for 2
years for the remaining part of the four-year block period except for
employees who are entitled to last LTC before retirement.

•

Use of Information Technology in government activities with large public
interface will be maximized to promote efficiency. For this purpose,
operations like GPF, pension, pay and accounts offices, passports, income
tax, customs, central excise, will be fully computerized by March 31, 2002.
Public sector banks and insurance companies are also being asked to
complete computerization of their operations within this period.

18

80.
The Expenditure Reforms Commission, which was set up last year, has
presented reports concerning downsizing in 6 Ministries and Departments. These
include Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting,
Ministry of Coal, Department of Heavy Industry, Department of Public Enterprises
and Ministry of Small Scale Industries. Reports of the Commission concerning other
Departments will also be received within the next six months. These recommendations
will be implemented by July 31, 2001 and identified surplus staff transferred to the
Surplus Pool.
81.
Charity, it is said, must begin at home. I believe austerity, too, must begin
at home. To lead by example, based on the recommendations of the Expenditure
Reforms Commission, I propose to abolish three secretary/special secretary level
and two joint secretary level posts in the Department of Economic Affairs. This will
be done in stages by 31, July. In addition, another 44 posts of directors and below
will be abolished, as against 31 recommended by the ERC. 1675 posts are being
abolished in the Currency and Coinage Division which will be restructured and
corporatised. The National Savings Organisation is to be downsized from a level of
1191 staff to about 25. I have asked ERC to provide their recommendations in respect
of the Departments of Revenue and Expenditure also. I am confident that this will
expedite the process of right sizing the establishments in all the Ministries/
Departments of Government.
82.
The Planning Commission has commenced the task of preparing the Tenth
Plan. Given the severity of resource constraints, improvement in the quality of
government spending is of the essence. It has therefore been decided to subject all
existing schemes, both at the Central and State levels, to zero based budgeting and
to retain only those that are demonstrably efficient and essential. Furthermore, all
schemes that are similar in nature will be converged to eliminate duplication. Centrally
sponsored schemes that can be transferred to States will be identified. Resource
flows will be linked to performance. Necessary procedural changes will also be made
to speed up the decision making process for approval of schemes. Utmost importance
will be given to decentralized planning.
Pension

Reforms

83.
The Central Government pension liability has reached unsustainable
proportions: as a percentage of GDP, it has risen from about 0.5 per cent in 1993-94
to 1 per cent in 2000-2001. As such it is envisaged that those who enter central
government services after October 1, 2001 would receive pension through a new
pension programme based on defined contributions. In order to review the existing
pension system and to provide a roadmap for the next steps to be taken by the
Government, I propose to constitute a High Level Expert Group, which would give its
recommendations within 3 months.
Interest Rates
84.
I have drawn your attention to the increasing share of debt service burden
in the expenditure budget caused by rising government debt and exacerbated by the
prevalence of high real interest rates. Most interest rates in the economy are now
market determined. But, their movement downward is constrained by the rigidities

19

inherent in the administered interest rates governing the contractual saving sphere
i.e. Provident Fund and Small Savings Schemes. I have examined this issue very
carefully. I find that the interest rates provided in all these schemes seldom exceeded
consumer price inflation by more than 3 per cent between 1980 and 1998. Since
then, this difference has risen to 6 to 8 per cent. Not only are such high real interest
rates putting an unsustainable burden on both Central and State Governments but
the resulting high cost of capital is also inhibiting economic growth all round. I am
therefore reducing most administered rates by 1.5 per cent as of March 1, 2001.
Government guarantee and tax incentives for these schemes will continue. For the
future, I propose to explore a better system for the determination of these rates. I
propose to appoint an Expert Committee to provide recommendations on this issue.
85.
The benefit of reduction in interest rates on Small Savings Deposits will be
fully passed on to the States. This will reduce their borrowing cost from Small Savings
by 100 to 150 basis points. In addition, I am also reducing the interest rate on loans
portion of Central assistance to State Plans by 50 basis points. Alignment of interest
rates on GPF by the State Governments along with the reduced provident funds
interest rates at the Centre will further reduce the interest burden of State
Governments. Moreover, because of the anticipated increase in gross tax collection
of the Centre, devolution of central taxes to States is expected to increase by over Rs
9000 crore in 2001-02 over the current year. All these measures will help in reducing
the debt burden of the States and improve their fiscal position.
State Fiscal Reforms
86.
Along with fiscal consolidation at the Centre, it will be our endeavour to
work jointly with the States to reform their finances. Pursuant to the recommendations
of the Eleventh Finance Commission, an Incentive Fund of Rs 10,607 crore has been
earmarked for the next 5 years to encourage States to implement monitorable fiscal
reforms. These reforms will essentially be the States’ own programmes and
considerable flexibility has been provided for individual States to design their
programmes. In the fiscal year 2001-02, I have provided an amount of Rs 4243 crore
towards this Incentive Fund.
PUBLIC SECTOR RESTRUCTURING AND PRIVATIZATION
87.
Our public sector has expanded in almost every area of economic activity.
In many ways, it has served the nation well; capability has been developed all round
and a strong industrial base built up. These enterprises must now be strengthened
to compete and prosper in the new environment. Last year I had defined government’s
policy in this regard clearly.
88.
Financial and business restructuring plans of a number of PSUs including
SAIL and HMT have been approved. Since 1998 financial restructuring support to
viable and potentially viable PSUs amounting to more than Rs 13,000 crore has
been provided to 23 PSUs. Government has also decided to close down 8 non-viable
PSUs during the current year. A package of measures for revival and closure of the
various mills of National Textiles Corporation has also been approved.
89.
The procedure for privatization of public sector enterprises has now been
considerably streamlined. The Department of Disinvestment has been set up to

20

accelerate the privatization process. To maximise returns to government, our approach
has shifted from the disinvestment of small lots of shares to strategic sales of blocks
of shares to strategic investors. The Government has already approved privatization
of 27 companies in which the process of disinvestment is expected to be completed
during the course of the year. These companies include among others VSNL, Air
India, and Maruti Udyog Limited.
90.
Given the advanced stage of the process of disinvestment in many of these
companies, I am emboldened to take credit for a receipt of Rs 12000 crore from
disinvestment during the next year. An amount of Rs 7000 crore out of this will be
used for providing restructuring assistance to PSUs, safety net to workers and
reduction of debt burden. A sum of Rs 5000 crore will be used to provide additional
budgetary support for the Plan primarily in the social and infrastructure sectors.
This additional allocation for the plan will be contingent upon realization of the
anticipated receipts. In consultation with Planning Commission I shall come up with
sectoral allocation proposals during the course of the year.
GUJARAT EARTHQUAKE
91.
The earthquake in Gujarat has been a terrible and unprecedented tragedy
in terms of loss of life and damage to property. Although I am confident that the
inherent resilience and entrepreneurial spirit so characteristic of the people of Gujarat
will result in quick restoration of economic activity, I would like to assure the House
that we have the capacity to fully meet the challenges of such natural calamities
without deflecting from our path of pursuing our economic goals.
92.
To enable the State Government to deal with the situation, Government of
India is extending the following assistance:
•

Rs 500 crore was made available to the State immediately from the National
Calamity Contingency Fund.

•

The National Calamity Contingency Fund, set up with initial corpus of Rs
500 crore as a result of the Eleventh Finance Commission recommendations,
is being augmented by the imposition of a 2 per cent surcharge on personal
income tax and corporate tax.

•

Assistance will be provided to the State Government under various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes for reconstruction of roads, bridges, power installations,
school buildings, public utilities and other public infrastructure.

•

Arrangements have been tied up with the World Bank and Asian
Development Bank for obtaining a line of credit of US $ 800 million. A joint
team has already visited Gujarat and substantial additional funds are
expected to be negotiated.

•

RBI has instructed banks to make special arrangements for freezing of
recoveries and extension of new loans on a liberal terms for borrowers in
the affected areas.

•

The National Housing Bank and HUDCO have set apart adequate funds for
housing reconstruction. I also propose to allocate a special quota of tax
free bonds of the order of Rs 2000 crore between the two institutions.

21

•

As was done after the Orissa cyclone, cement and steel used for construction
in the Indira Awas Yojana, by HUDCO and by agencies identified by the
State Government, would be exempt from excise duty.

•

The Government of Gujarat will be enabled to raise funds by floating tax
free earthquake relief bonds which will be open to subscription in Rupees
to individuals and others including Non-Resident Indians through the
Reserve Bank of India.

•

All goods intended for relief have been exempted from excise and customs
duties; direct tax assessees have been given extension of time for filing
their returns.

93.
A natural calamity of this magnitude has also highlighted the need to set
up permanent institutional arrangements for management of national disasters.
The National Committee on Disaster Management under the Chairmanship of Prime
Minister will be making recommendations for laying down effective long term strategy
for this purpose.
BUDGET ESTIMATES
Revised Estimates for 2000-2001
94.
We have been able to adhere to the Budget target of fiscal deficit despite
pressures on public finances on account of deceleration in disinvestment programme,
natural calamities and the relief to consumers of petroleum products. The revised
estimates for the current fiscal year show a marginal decrease in expenditure of Rs
2,965 crore as compared to the Budget estimates.
95.
Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated to be Rs 1,44,403 crore
compared to the Budget estimates of Rs 1,46,209 crore, thereby reflecting a shortfall
of Rs 1806 crore. The shortfall is mainly due to lower collection of Customs and
Union Excise duties which were reduced to provide relief to POL consumers. Non tax
revenue is estimated at Rs 61,763 crore, Rs 4299 crore more than the estimated
level of Rs 57,464 crore. However, disinvestment receipts are expected to be lower at
Rs 2500 crore against the Budget target of Rs 10,000 crore.
96.
The fiscal deficit as a percentage of the GDP is expected to be on target at
5.1 per cent.
Budget Estimates for 2001-2002
97.
In the budget estimates for 2001-2002, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs 3,75,223 crore, of which Rs 100,100 crore is for plan and
Rs 275,123 crore for non-plan.
Plan Expenditure
98.
The budget support for Central, State and UT Plans has been placed at Rs
100,100 crore, an increase of Rs 13,862 crore over revised estimates 2000-2001.
This amounts to an increase of 16 per cent. Gross budgetary support for the Central
Plan is being enhanced from Rs 48,269 crore in the revised estimates 2000-2001 to
Rs 59,456 crore in 2001-2002. Central Plan assistance to States and Union Territories
in 2001-2002 is also proposed to be increased to Rs 40,644 crore from Rs 37,969
crore in the revised estimates 2000-2001.

22

Non Plan Expenditure
99.
Non-plan expenditure in 2001-2002 is estimated to be Rs 2,75,123 crore
compared to Rs 2,49,284 crore in Revised estimates for 2000-2001. The increase in
non-plan expenditure is mainly in interest payments (Rs 11,633 crores), defence (Rs
7,539 crore) and Grants to State Governments (Rs 2,221 crore).
1 0 0 . In order to practice greater accountability and transparency, I am attaching
with the budget papers this year a new report on “Implementation of Budget
Announcements, 1999-2000 and 2000-01”.
PART B
1 0 1 . Sir, I now present my tax proposals, indirect taxes first.
1 0 2 . In my earlier budgets, I have endeavoured to ensure a continuity of approach
in framing my revenue proposals. The principles that have guided me have been the
need for growth in revenues, simplification and rationalization of the tax regime, and
effective tax compliance through measures, which are friendly for the honest taxpayer,
and a deterrent to the evader. I have reduced the number of rates in both customs
and excise duties, simplified procedures and introduced measures to improve tax
compliance. I have given up my discretionary power to grant excise and customs
duty exemptions in individual cases thus saving hundreds of crore of revenue for
Government. The policy of penalties against tax evaders has also been made nondiscretionary. With all these steps I have sought to put an end to a system that
pressure groups or lobbies could influence. My attempt this year is to take this
process to its logical conclusion.
1 0 3 . In my last budget, I had introduced the rate of 16% as the rate of Central
Value Added Tax (CENVAT). I had also rationalized the rates of special excise duty to
three, namely, 8%, 16% and 24%.
The single rate of CENVAT now contributes
about 68% of the total excise revenues from ad valorem duties.
1 0 4 . I now propose to reduce the three rates of special excise duty to a single
rate of 16%. As a consequence, I propose to abolish the 8% special excise duty on
the following items:
(1)

Glazed tiles

(2)

Mattresses and articles of bedding

(3)

Carpets and floor coverings

(4)

Painted canvas, studio back cloth, etc

(5)

Linoleum and textile wall coverings etc.

(6)

Scooters and motorcycles, and

(7)

Ta x i s

These items will now be charged to CENVAT only at the rate of 16%.

23

1 0 5 . White cement and other special cements, yachts and pleasure boats, arms
and ammunition for private use and articles of fur skins, will attract SED of 16%
and a total duty of 32%.
1 0 6 . The special excise duty on aerated soft drinks, soft drink concentrates
supplied to vending machines, and motorcars will be reduced to 16%, thus putting
an end to the rate of 24% special excise duty. These items also will now bear a total
duty of 32%. There will be no change in respect of products, which already attract
this rate of 32%.
1 0 7 . There are a few items that currently attract CENVAT at half the rate, namely,
8%. All these items will henceforth be charged to the normal rate of 16% except
cotton yarn including sewing thread, LPG, kerosene and diesel engines up to 10 HP,
which I am leaving at 8% for the present in the larger public interest.
1 0 8 . After these rationalization measures about 80% of the revenue in respect
of ad valorem duties will come from the single rate of 16% and about 17% from the
combined rate of 32%.
1 0 9 . India is the world’s second largest producer of fruits and vegetables. However,
most of these are wasted in the absence of proper storage and processing facilities.
Food-processing industry dealing in perishable fruits and vegetables needs special
support. I, therefore, propose to exempt food preparations based on fruits and
vegetables completely from excise duty. This will include a very wide range of products
of common use like pickles, sauces, ketchup and juices, etc. This, along with the
support I have given to creation of better storage facilities will give a fillip to the food
processing industry and will go a long way in improving the rural economy of our
country.
1 1 0 . The Eleventh Finance Commission has recommended a special levy for the
replenishment of the National Calamity Contingency Fund. As an ad hoc measure,
this was provided for in the current year through a special surcharge on corporate
taxes. I propose to establish this funding on a regular basis through a special
surcharge of excise on a range of products the use of which should be discouraged
on health grounds. I propose to levy a surcharge of 15% on cigarettes. The duty on
biris would increase from Rs 6 to Rs 7 per thousand biris. The total duty on pan
masala would be 55%/60%. Miscellaneous tobacco products like chewing tobacco
would be charged to a total duty of 60%.
1 1 1 . Excise duty on High Speed Diesel was reduced from 16% to 12% in
September last year. I propose to restore it to the normal CENVAT rate of 16%. I also
propose to restore special excise duty on motor spirit to the previous rate of 16%.
The burden of increase in duty is not proposed to be passed on to the consumers
except for any technical corrections.
1 1 2 . LPG is charged to excise duty at 8%. I propose to apply the same rate of
duty to Compressed Natural Gas, which is exempt at present.
1 1 3 . A special scheme of charging excise duty from independent textile processors
on compounding basis was introduced in December 1998. The working of this scheme
has resulted in serious distortions. I have therefore decided to revert to the ad valorem

24

duty structure for independent textile processors with effect from 1, March 2001.
Independent processors would be allowed to take CENVAT credit of the duty paid on
inputs on a deemed basis.
1 1 4 . There is no economic logic to continue with excise duty exemption on
garments sold under a registered trade name. I propose to impose a duty of 16% on
such garments.
1 1 5 . Products of SSI units are exempt from excise duty up to Rs one crore. This
exemption is intended to provide fiscal support to the genuinely small producers. I
propose to withdraw this exemption in respect of the following items, in which misuse
of the exemption is more than likely:
«

Cotton yarn

«

Ball or roller bearings

«

Arms and ammunition for private use

1 1 6 . The excise duty structure on matches comprises rates of duty ranging from
25 paise to Rs 2.40 per hundred boxes of 50 sticks each. I propose to rationalise the
existing rates to a more rational structure with a duty rate of 50 paise for the
handmade sector, Re.1 for the middle sector, Rs 2 for the semi-mechanized sector
and Rs 3 for the mechanized sector.
1 1 7 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, in the matter of rates of duties of excise I have almost
achieved the ultimate with only one basic rate of CENVAT and one rate of special
excise duty. The procedures in excise have also been made modern. I can humbly
claim that excise duty is now a model of value added tax up to the manufacturing
stage.
1 1 8 . The only issue, which remains to be tackled now, is the issue of individual
exemptions. The regime of exemptions is incompatible with a simple, equitable and
rational tax structure that has now been put in place. I am not doing away with the
exemptions altogether, realizing that this may come as a sudden shock to those who
are accustomed to exemptions. However, I will like to give notice to them to be prepared
to pay duties like anyone else. For the present, I am making a modest beginning by
imposing a nominal duty of 4% on some items like goggles, imitation jewellery,
rubberized mattresses etc. which in four equal annual installments will be taken to
16%. More and more items will be put on this escalator every year.
1 1 9 . Structural changes have taken place in the economy with the service sector
growing faster than other sectors. I am expanding the net of service tax and I propose
to add the following services to the list of taxable services:
•

Specified Banking and Financial Services

•

Authorized Service Stations for servicing of vehicles including two wheelers

•

Port Services

•

Broadcasting Services

25

•

Photographic Services

•

Convention Services

•

Sound Recording Services

•

Scientific and Technical Consulting Services

•

Telex Services

•

Telegraph Services

•

Facsimile Services

•

On-line Information & Data Base Retrieval services

•

Video Tape Production Services

•

Services auxiliary to Insurance

1 2 0 . I propose to bring the service provided to lease circuit line holders also in
the tax net.
1 2 1 . I now turn to my proposals relating to customs duties.
1 2 2 . In my previous budgets, I have reduced the total number of major customs
duty rates to four, that is, 35%, 25%, 15% and 5%. I do not wish to propose any
further reduction in the number of customs duty rates this year. However, I propose
to discontinue the surcharge of 10%. With this, peak level of customs duty will
decline marginally from 38.5% to 35%.
1 2 3 . All agricultural produce already attracts the peak rate of duty of 35% or
more. Current tariffs on major cereals are: Wheat (50%), Rice (70%/80%) and Maize
(50%). I now propose to increase the customs duty on tea, coffee, copra, and coconut
and desiccated coconut from the present 35% to 70%.
1 2 4 . Similarly, I propose to increase the rate of duty on crude edible oils ranging
from 35% to 55% at present to a uniform rate of 75% and on refined oils from 45%/
65% to 85%. A lower rate of 45% would apply to soyabean oil on account of WTO
binding. I also propose to enhance the rate of customs duty on the import of crude
palm oil by vanaspati manufacturers from 25% to 55% and restrict this concession
to sick vanaspati units only. The others will pay 75%. I wish to assure the House
that in order to safeguard the interest of our farmers we shall move swiftly whenever
any perceptible threat on account of imports is noticed.
1 2 5 . The House is aware that Government has committed itself to abolish customs
duty on IT and telecom products and their inputs and components under the ITA 1
Schedule by 2003. The customs duty on these products is proposed to be reduced to
15% from 1, March 2001 from current levels.
1 2 6 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with the abolition of the remaining Quantitative Restrictions
in April this year second hand cars will also become freely importable. To allay the
fears of surge in import of second hand cars, the rate of basic customs duty on their

26

import will be raised to 105%, which is three times the peak rate. The total duty now
applicable to second hand cars will be more than 180%. I propose a similar structure
of duty for the import of old multi utility vehicles, scooters and motor cycles.
1 2 7 . In order to provide a level playing field for domestic liquor producers, I
propose to levy CVD at a suitable rate on imported liquor, taking into account the
levies of state excise on domestic production.
1 2 8 . Our textile industry has to modernize itself and acquire the latest technology
in order to face global competition and attain high quality of production. I propose to
reduce the basic customs duty on specified textile machines, including shuttle-less
looms, from 15% to 5%. As a measure of further relief to the textile sector, I propose,
to reduce the customs duty on silk waste, cotton waste and flax fibre from 35% /
25% to 15%.
1 2 9 . There are some cases of anomaly in customs duty between raw materials
and intermediate goods on the one hand, and intermediate goods and final products
on the other. DMT, PTA, MEG and Caprolactum are raw materials for production of
man-made fibers and yarns. However, the customs duty on these materials is higher
than the rate applicable to fibers and yarn. I propose to reduce the customs duty on
DMT, PTA, MEG and Caprolactum from 25% to 20%, which is the WTO bound rate
for synthetic fibers and yarns. Similarly, soda ash is an input for the production of
glassware, detergents etc. and currently attracts the peak customs duty of 35%
along with the final products. I propose to reduce it to 20%. I also propose to reduce
the customs duty on polyester chips and nylon chips for the manufacture of fibers
and yarns from 35% to 25%.
1 3 0 . On the same analogy, the customs duty on high quality DBM, seawater
magnesia and fused magnesia is being reduced from 25% to 15%.
1 3 1 . Gems and jewellery have considerable potential for export. I propose to
reduce the customs duty on cut and polished coloured gem stones from 35% to
15%. I also propose to reduce the customs duty on specified equipment when imported
by training institutes sponsored by the Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council
from 25% to 15%. The rate of customs duty on rough diamonds would now be 5%.
1 3 2 . CNG kits and their parts attract low duty at 5%. I propose to extend the
same treatment to LPG conversion kits and their parts.
1 3 3 . LNG is not produced in India. The burden of CVD on the import of LNG
adds to the cost of LNG projects. I therefore propose to exempt LNG from CVD.
1 3 4 . For the same reason, I also propose to exempt wattle extract from the
application of CVD.
1 3 5 . I propose to reduce the customs duty on cement, and clinkers from 35% to
25%. I am confident that this reduction would help softening of domestic prices of
cement for the benefit of consumers.
1 3 6 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, accredited pressmen and cameramen are allowed to import
cameras, computers, fax machine etc. up to a value of one lakh rupees for their
professional use without payment of customs duty once in five years.
In view of

27

many good photographs they have taken of use, I propose to reduce this long waiting
period from five years to two years.
1 3 7 . In order to encourage better quality of cinematography I propose to reduce
the customs duty on cinematographic cameras, projectors and certain other related
equipment used by the film industry from 25% to 15%.
1 3 8 . In order to discourage smuggling I propose to reduce the duty on gold from
Rs 400 per 10 grams to Rs 250 per 10 grams.
1 3 9 . Several industry associations have pointed out that the CVD on the imported
consumer products should also be charged on the basis of maximum retail price;
otherwise it does not provide a level playing field. I accept the logic of their argument.
The Finance Bill contains the enabling provision to implement this decision.
1 4 0 . I propose to withdraw the exemption from customs duty on a few items and
impose on them a nominal duty of 5%.
1 4 1 . I have already promised that our customs tariff would be brought down to
East Asian levels. I will like to move progressively within three years to reduce the
number of rates to the minimum with a peak rate of 20%. The modalities for this
will be worked out in time for the next budget.
1 4 2 . Sir, a number of steps are also being taken for greater procedural and
administrative efficiency.
1 4 3 . A new Manual of Procedures and Instructions on Central Excise and
Customs would be brought out by 1, September 2001. The emphasis would be on
simplicity, brevity and transparency. I also propose to simplify the central excise
rules to make them user friendly.
1 4 4 . My proposals on the excise side are estimated to result in a revenue gain of
Rs 4677 crore in a year. On the customs side my proposals are estimated to result in
a revenue loss of Rs 2128 crore. I estimate that the indirect tax revenue next year
would be Rs 1,40,992 crore.
1 4 5 . Copies of the notifications issued to give effect to the changes in excise and
customs duties shall be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
1 4 6 . In Direct Taxes, my thrust during the last three years has been on providing
stability of tax rates, widening the tax base, rationalizing and simplifying the tax
laws and giving impetus to economic growth. These efforts have resulted in increasing
the direct tax revenue from Rs 46,428 crore in 1998-99 to an estimated Rs 74,467
crore this year. In addition, the number of assessees has increased significantly
from a little over one crore in March 1998 to 2.3 crore at the beginning of this year.
I, therefore, propose to continue with the same rates this year also. Co-operative
Societies, however, will henceforth pay 30% tax instead of 35%.
1 4 7 . While imposing the surcharge of 10 % on corporates and non-corporates in
my budget of 1999-2000, I had promised that this would be a temporary levy. However,
I was constrained to increase the surcharge on non-corporate tax payers at the
higher income levels to 15% due to the unexpected expenditure burden of Kargil.

28

During the course of this financial year I had further levied a surchage of 1% on
corporates towards the National Calamity Contingency Fund and an additional 2%
on all tax payers for the Gujarat Earthquake relief. I now propose to remove all
surcharges payable by corporates and non-corporates except the surcharge of 2 %
for relief to quake hit areas of Gujarat. Individuals having an income of up to Rs
60,000/- will not be subject to this surcharge.
1 4 8 . As a welfare measure, Sir, I propose to allow 100% deduction for donations
to the National Trust for welfare of persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation and multiple disabilities.
1 4 9 . Hon’ble Members are aware that the modified one-by-six scheme, which I
introduced in the Finance Act, 1998 to identify potential income-tax assessees and
to bring them into the tax net, has paid rich dividends. I, therefore, propose to
extend the one-by-six scheme to all urban areas in the country as defined by the
1991 Census. Changes arising out of the 2001 census will be incorporated
subsequently.
1 5 0 . Certain companies are not filing their returns of income, presumably on
the plea that they are not having any taxable income. These companies go out of
fiscal discipline and their financial transactions during the initial years escape
scrutiny. I therefore, propose that all companies should file their returns even if they
incur a loss.
1 5 1 . Sir, another effective measure of widening the tax base is to further enlarge
the scope of deduction of tax at source. Income tax at source will henceforth be
deductible at the rate of 10 % on income by way of commission or brokerage exceeding
Rs 2,500/-, except on transactions relating to shares and securities.
1 5 2 . Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles etc. are currently taxed at 40%.
As the marginal personal income tax rates have now stabilized at 30%, this income
will also now be taxed at 30%. Television game shows are very popular these days. I
wish the winners well. At the same time, I propose that income tax at the rate of 30%
will be deducted at source from the winnings of these and all similar game shows.
1 5 3 . At present, tax is deducted at source on income from interest on time
deposits only if such income exceeds Rs 10,000/- in respect of deposits with a Bank
or Housing Finance Company and Rs 5,000/- in other cases. These threshold limits
have led to the erosion of tax base and under-reporting of taxable income due to
splitting up of deposits. I, therefore, propose to lower this limit to Rs 2,500/- in all
cases.
1 5 4 . With economic liberalization, the pay package of salaried class is undergoing
many changes. It is being divided into various components and the forms of perquisites
and benefits or amenities provided by the employers are assuming new dimensions.
To align our tax system with the present structure of pay packages, I propose that
the value of perquisites, benefits or amenities shall be determined on the basis of
their cost to the employer, except in respect of houses and cars where different
criteria will be adopted for simplicity.

29

1 5 5 . Sir, I also propose to provide relief to salaried persons in the lower income
range having income up to rupees one lakh. Such persons will get an enhanced tax
rebate at the rate of 30% in respect of their eligible investments under section 88 of
the Income Tax Act, as against 20% at present.
1 5 6 . In the case of Export Oriented Units, and units located in Export Processing
Zones, Free Trade Zones and Software Technology Parks 25% of their sales in the
domestic market are currently tax exempt. I propose to provide for the taxation of
profits from these domestic sales of such units.
1 5 7 . I.T. Sector continues to do well and should be encouraged to do better. I,
therefore, propose that profits derived by the units located in the software technology
parks from the export of “on-site” services will be eligible for deduction like their
other export income. Units located outside these zones will also get the benefit of tax
exemption on such export earnings. I further propose that the condition relating to
transfer of ownership of companies in sections 10A and 10B of the Income-tax Act
shall not apply in respect of companies in which public are substantially interested.
1 5 8 . The income of NABARD, National Housing Bank and Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) was exempted from tax in order to provide fiscal
support in the initial years of their functioning. Now these institutions have come of
age and are working on commercial lines. I, therefore, propose to withdraw the tax
exemption available to these institutions.
1 5 9 . The interest payable on certain External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) is
currently exempt from tax. Having regard to the fact that interest received by the
lender is taxable in the country of his residence and he would get a credit for any tax
paid by him in India, any exemption from tax liability in the host country does not
benefit the lender but only results in reducing our tax revenues. I, therefore, propose
that the tax exemption in respect of interest paid on such External Commercial
Borrowings will not be available for such borrowings made on or after the first day of
June 2001.
1 6 0 . Certain interest income up to a limit of Rs 12,000 is deductible at present
under section 80L. In addition, income from Government securities is also
deductible up to Rs 3,000. I propose to reduce the maximum limit of this deduction
to Rs 9,000.
1 6 1 . The tax payable on the distribution of dividends of domestic companies
and income in respect of Units of Mutual Funds and UTI was increased from 10% to
20% last year. To provide a stimulus to the growth of capital market, I propose to
reduce this tax to 10%.
1 6 2 . To help revive investor-interest in primary issues I propose to exempt longterm capital gains arising from the sale of securities and Units if such gains are
reinvested in primary issues of shares of public companies.
1 6 3 . Sir, the tax incentives in the form of tax holidays for infrastructure facilities
are proposed to be further rationalized and enlarged. For the core sectors of
infrastructure namely, roads, highways, rail system, water treatment and supply,
irrigation, sanitation and solid waste management systems, I now propose a ten-

30

year tax holiday which may be availed of during the initial twenty years. In the case
of airports, ports, inland ports and waterways, industrial parks and generation and
distribution of power, which also become commercially viable only in the long run, a
tax holiday of ten years is being proposed to be availed of during the initial fifteen
years. The period of commencement of business for power and industrial parks is
also being extended up to 31, March 2006.
1 6 4 . The five-year tax holiday and 30 % deduction for next five years was available
to the telecommunications sector till 31, March 2000. I propose to reintroduce this
concession retrospectively for the units commencing their operations on or before
31, March 2003. These concessions will also be extended to internet service providers
and broadband networks.
1 6 5 . Sir, in addition to the tax holiday proposed for development of infrastructure,
tax incentives have also been provided for the investors providing long-term finance
or investing in the equity capital of the enterprises engaged in infrastructure facility.
Any income by way of interest, dividends or long-term capital gains from such
investments is fully exempt. I propose to extend this concession to guarantee
commissions and credit enhancement fees earned by financial institutions from
infrastructure enterprises. Co-operative Banks will also be eligible for exemption of
their income from investments in approved infrastructure facilities.
1 6 6 . To be globally competitive, our companies need to increase their investment
and expenditure for Research and Development. Currently, a weighted deduction of
150% of the expenditure on in-house research and development in certain areas is
allowed to companies. Sir, I propose to extend this weighted deduction to biotechnology
as well for clinical trials, filing patents and obtaining regulatory approvals. I also
propose that the entire amount paid to specified projects under the India Millennium
Mission, 2020 will be eligible for 125 % weighted deduction.
1 6 7 . To encourage development of industrial infrastructure, I had provided
100% deduction of export profits for a period of ten years to units operating in the
Special Economic Zones last year. I now propose to give further tax incentives for
the development of these zones. The concessions available for infrastructure by
way of a 10-year tax holiday will be available to the developers of Special Economic
Zones on the same lines as developers of industrial parks. The income of investors
making long term investment for the development of SEZs will also be exempt.
1 6 8 . The storage of food grains and their transportation are our major concern.
Sir, I propose to provide a tax holiday for five years and 30% deduction of profits for
the next five years to the enterprises engaged in the integrated business of handling,
transportation and storage of food-grains.
1 6 9 . Sir, for promoting the industry that provides the cup that cheers, I propose
to increase the development allowance available for tea from 20% to 40%. This
additional allowance will be used only for re-plantation, rejuvenation, and
modernization of tea plantations and processing facilities.
1 7 0 There has been a long-standing demand from the Shipping Industry that
the rate of depreciation available in respect of ships and inland water vessels may be
increased. I propose to increase this rate of depreciation to 25%.

31

1 7 1 . To encourage investments in weaving, processing and garment sectors of
the textile industry, I propose to allow accelerated depreciation at the rate of 50% on
plants and machinery purchased under the Technology Up-gradation Fund Scheme.
1 7 2 . In order to give a boost to the commercial vehicles sector presently facing
recession, I propose to allow accelerated depreciation at the rate of 50% on new
commercial vehicles for one year.
1 7 3 . Each of my past three budgets has provided for increasing tax incentives
for the housing sector. Sir, continuing with this practice, I propose to further increase
the maximum amount of deduction available for interest payable on housing loans
for self-occupied houses from rupees one lakh to rupees one and a half lakhs.
1 7 4 . For persons having income from house property, the present deduction of
25 % of annual value for repairs etc. is proposed to be enhanced to 30%. However,
there will be no further deductions, except for the expenditure incurred by way of
interest payment on housing loans.
1 7 5 . I propose to extend the tax incentives allowed by way of deduction or rebate
on payments of LIC premium to all insurance companies that have been approved
by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
1 7 6 . The presence of multinational enterprises in India and their ability to allocate
profits in different jurisdictions by controlling prices in intra-group transactions has
made the issue of transfer pricing a matter of serious concern. I had set up an
Expert Group in November 1999 to examine the issues relating to transfer pricing.
Their report has been received, proposing a detailed structure for transfer pricing
legislation. Necessary legislative changes are being made in the Finance Bill based
on these recommendations.
177.
The foreign telecasting channels will henceforth be taxed in India, on their
income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act.
1 7 8 . Sir, I propose to bring about a number of measures that will be friendly to
the taxpayer. The time limits for issue of refunds, reassessment and reopening of
assessments by the Income-tax Department are proposed to be reduced. The
Department will also no longer have power to withhold the refund due to an assessee.
Similarly, there will be no requirement to obtain a Tax Clearance Certificate under
section 230A from the Assessing Officer before transfer of immovable property. I
also propose to remove the discretion presently available in deciding the quantum of
penalties. Henceforth, a fixed amount of penalty will be leviable for most of the
defaults.
1 7 9 . Certain educational and medical institutions are required to be approved
for claiming tax exemption. At present, these institutions have to file their application
for approval to the Central Board of Direct Taxes. Sir, I propose to delegate this
power to Chief Commissioners of Income-tax.
1 8 0 . To sum up, Sir, my proposals made in this Budget on the Direct Taxes will
result in a revenue loss of Rs 5,500 crore, which I propose to make up with tax

32

buoyancy and increased voluntary compliance. I estimate that the direct tax revenue
in 2001-2002 would be Rs 84,800 crore.
1 8 1 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these proposals I estimate total tax revenue receipts
for the Centre at Rs 163031 crore and the fiscal deficit at Rs 116314 crore or 4.7%
of GDP. I could have managed a lesser fiscal deficit but that would have been possible
only at the cost of growth, which was unacceptable.
1 8 2 . This is a budget for carrying forward the second generation of economic
reforms. This is a budget for growth. This is a budget for equity with efficiency.
This is a budget for a new deal to the people of India in the new millennium.
1 8 3 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the budget to this august
house.

