CONTENTS
PART - A
Page No.
Introduction

1

I.

Farmers

6

II.

Rural population

8

III.

Youth

10

IV.

The poor and the underprivileged

12

V.

Infrastructure

14

VI.

Financial sector

17

VII.

Digital economy

20

VIII.

Public service

21

IX.

Prudent fiscal management

23

PART – B
Measures for Promoting Affordable Housing
and Real Estate Sector

26

Measures for Stimulating Growth

27

Promoting Digital Economy

29

Transparency in Electoral Funding

29

Ease of Doing Business

30

Personal Income-Tax

32

Goods and Services Tax

33

RAPID

33

Conclusion

34

2
Page No.
Annexes
Annexes to Part – A
Annex-I

:

Other measures in the Financial Sector

35

Allocations of Important Ministries,
Sectors and Vulnerable Sections

36

Annex-II B :

Allocation for Important Schemes

38

Annex-II C

Resources Transferred to State and
UTs with Legislature

40

Annex-II A :

:

Annex-III to Part – B
Direct Tax

41

Indirect Tax

46

3

Budget 2017-2018
Speech of

Arun Jaitley
Minister of Finance
February 1, 2017

Madam Speaker,
On this auspicious day of Vasant Panchami, I rise to present the Budget
for 2017-18. Spring is a season of optimism. I extend my warm greetings to
everyone on this occasion.
2.
Madam Speaker, our Government was elected amidst huge
expectations of the people. The underlying theme of countless expectations
was good governance. The expectations included burning issues like
inflation and price rise, corruption in day to day transactions and crony
capitalism. There was also expectation for a major change in the way the
country’s natural resources were allocated, processed and deployed.
3.
In the last two and half years, it has been our mission to bring a
Transformative Shift in the way our country is governed. We have moved


from a discretionary administration to a policy and system
based administration;



from favouritism to transparency and objectivity in decision
making;



from blanket and loose entitlements to targeted delivery; and



from informal economy to formal economy.

Inflation, which was in double digits, has been controlled; sluggish growth
has been replaced by high growth; and a massive war against black money
has been launched. We have worked tirelessly on all these fronts and feel
encouraged by the unstinted support of the people to our initiatives. The
Government is now seen as a trusted custodian of public money. I take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to the people of India for their strong
support.
4.
We shall continue to undertake many more measures to ensure that
the fruits of growth reach the farmers, the workers, the poor, the scheduled

4
castes and scheduled tribes, women and other vulnerable sections of our
society. Our focus will be on energising our youth to reap the benefits of
growth and employment.
5.
Madam Speaker, I am presenting this Budget when the world
economy faces considerable uncertainty, in the aftermath of major
economic and political developments during the last one year.
Nevertheless, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates that world
GDP will grow by 3.1% in 2016 and 3.4% in 2017. The advanced economies
are expected to increase their growth from 1.6% to 1.9% and the emerging
economies from 4.1% to 4.5%. As per current indications, macro-economic
policy is expected to be more expansionary in certain large economies.
Growth in a number of emerging economies is expected to recover in 2017,
after relatively poor performance in 2016. These are positive signs and
point to an optimistic outlook for the next year.
6.
There are, however, three major challenges for emerging
economies. First, the current monetary policy stance of the US Federal
Reserve, to increase the policy rates more than once in 2017, may lead to
lower capital inflows and higher outflows from the emerging economies.
Second, the uncertainty around commodity prices, especially that of crude
oil, has implications for the fiscal situation of emerging economies. It is
however expected that increase, if any, in oil prices would get tempered by
quick response from producers of shale gas and oil. This would have a
sobering impact on prices of crude and petroleum. Third, in several parts of
the world, there are signs of increasing retreat from globalisation of goods,
services and people, as pressures for protectionism are building up. These
developments have the potential to affect exports from a number of
emerging markets, including India.
7.
Amidst all these developments, India stands out as a bright spot in
the world economic landscape. India’s macro-economic stability continues
to be the foundation of economic success. CPI inflation declined from 6% in
July 2016 to 3.4% in December, 2016 and is expected to remain within RBI’s
mandated range of 2% to 6%. Favourable price developments reflect
prudent macro-economic management, resulting in higher agricultural
production, especially in pulses. India’s Current Account Deficit declined
from about 1% of GDP last year to 0.3% of GDP in the first half of 2016-17.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) increased from ` 1,07,000 crores in the first
half of last year to ` 1,45,000 crores in the first half of 2016-17. This marks
an increase by 36%, despite 5% reduction in global FDI inflows. Foreign
exchange reserves have reached 361 billion US Dollars as on 20 th January,

5
2017, which represents a comfortable cover for about 12 months of
imports.
8.
The Government has also continued on the steady path of fiscal
consolidation, without compromising on the public investment
requirements of the economy. Externally, the economy successfully
weathered a number of shocks, the redemption of FCNR deposits, volatility
from the US elections and the Fed rate hike. According to IMF forecast,
India is expected to be one of the fastest growing major economies in 2017.
9.
A number of global reports and assessments, over the last two
years, have shown that India has considerably improved its policies,
practices and economic profile. These are reflected in Doing Business
Report of the World Bank; World Investment Report 2016 of UNCTAD;
Global Competitiveness Report of 2015-16 and 2016-17 of the World
Economic Forum; and several other Reports. India has become the sixth
largest manufacturing country in the world, up from ninth previously. We
are seen as an engine of global growth.
10.
In the last one year, our country has witnessed historic and
impactful economic reforms and policy making. In fact, India was one of the
very few economies undertaking transformational reforms. There were two
tectonic policy initiatives, namely, passage of the Constitution Amendment
Bill for GST and the progress for its implementation ; and demonetisation of
high denomination bank notes. The advantages of GST for our economy in
terms of spurring growth, competitiveness, indirect tax simplification and
greater transparency have already been extensively discussed in both
Houses of Parliament. I thank all Members of both the Houses for having
passed the Constitution Amendment unanimously. I also thank the State
Governments for resolving all relevant issues in the GST Council.
11.
Demonetisation of high denomination bank notes was in
continuation of a series of measures taken by our Government during the
last two years. It is a bold and decisive measure. For several decades, tax
evasion for many has become a way of life. This compromises the larger
public interest and creates unjust enrichment in favour of the tax evader, to
the detriment of the poor and deprived. This has bred a parallel economy
which is unacceptable for an inclusive society. Demonetisation seeks to
create a new ‘normal’ wherein the GDP would be bigger, cleaner and real.
This exercise is part of our Government’s resolve to eliminate corruption,
black money, counterfeit currency and terror funding. Like all reforms, this
measure is obviously disruptive, as it seeks to change the retrograde status
quo. Drop in economic activity, if any, on account of the currency squeeze
during the remonetisation period is expected to have only a transient

6
impact on the economy. I am reminded here of what the Father of the
Nation, Mahatma Gandhi, had said: “A right cause never fails”.
12.
Demonetisation has strong potential to generate long-term benefits
in terms of reduced corruption, greater digitisation of the economy,
increased flow of financial savings and greater formalisation of the
economy, all of which would eventually lead to higher GDP growth and tax
revenues. Demonetisation helps to transfer resources from the tax evaders
to the Government, which can use these resources for the welfare of the
poor and the deprived. There is early evidence of an increased capacity of
Banks to lend at reduced interest rates and a huge shift towards digitisation
among all sections of society. We firmly believe that demonetisation and
GST which were built on the third transformational achievement of our
Government, namely, the JAM vision, will have an epoch making impact on
our economy and the lives of our people.
13.
Madam Speaker, we are at an important turning point in the path of
our growth and development.
<ºÉ àÉÉä½ {É® PÉ¤É®É BÉäE xÉ lÉàÉ VÉÉ<A +ÉÉ{É
VÉÉä ¤ÉÉiÉ xÉªÉÉÒ cè =ºÉä +É{ÉxÉÉ<A +ÉÉ{É
b®iÉä cé xÉªÉÉÒ ®Éc {Éä BÉDªÉÉå SÉãÉxÉä ºÉä
càÉ +ÉÉMÉä-+ÉÉMÉä SÉãÉiÉä cé +ÉÉVÉÉ<A +ÉÉ{É
14.
The pace of remonetisation has picked up and will soon reach
comfortable levels. The effects of demonetisation are not expected to spill
over into the next year. Thus IMF, even while revising India’s GDP forecast
for 2016 downwards, has projected a GDP growth of 7.2% and 7.7% in 2017
and 2018 respectively. The World Bank, however, is more optimistic and
has projected a GDP growth of 7% in 2016-17, 7.6% in 2017-18 and 7.8% in
2018-19. This pick up in our economy is premised upon our policy and
determination to continue with economic reforms; increase in public
investment in infrastructure and development projects; and export growth
in the context of the expected rebound in world economy. The surplus
liquidity in the banking system, created by demonetisation, will lower
borrowing costs and increase the access to credit. This will boost economic
activity, with multiplier effects.
15.
The announcements made by Honourable Prime Minister on 31 st
December, 2016 address many of the key concerns of our economy at this
juncture, such as, housing for the poor; relief to farmers; credit support to

7
MSMEs; encouragement to digital transactions; assistance to pregnant
women and senior citizens; and priority to dalits, tribals, backward classes
and women under the Mudra Yojana.
16.
My overall approach, while preparing this Budget, has been to spend
more in rural areas, infrastructure and poverty alleviation and yet maintain
the best standards of fiscal prudence. I have also kept in mind the need to
continue with economic reforms, promote higher investments and
accelerate growth.
17.
The last one year was a witness to other major reforms, namely,
enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code; amendment to the RBI
Act for inflation targeting; enactment of the Aadhar bill for disbursement of
financial subsidies and benefits; significant reforms in FDI policy; the job
creating package for textile sector; and several other measures. We will
continue the process of economic reforms for the benefit of the poor and
the underprivileged.
18.
Madam Speaker, the Budget for 2017-18 contains three major
reforms. First, the presentation of the Budget has been advanced to 1 st
February to enable the Parliament to avoid a Vote on Account and pass a
single Appropriation Bill for 2017-18, before the close of the current
financial year. This would enable the Ministries and Departments to
operationalise all schemes and projects, including the new schemes, right
from the commencement of the next financial year. They would be able to
fully utilise the available working season before the onset of the monsoon.
Second, the merger of the Railways Budget with the General Budget is a
historic step. We have discontinued the colonial practice prevalent since
1924. This decision brings the Railways to the centre stage of Government’s
fiscal policy and would facilitate multi modal transport planning between
railways, highways and inland waterways. The functional autonomy of
Railways will, however, continue. Third, we have done away with the plan
and non-plan classification of expenditure. This will give us a holistic view
of allocations for sectors and ministries. This would facilitate optimal
allocation of resources.
19.
Madam Speaker, we are aware that we need to do more for our
people. Continuing with the task of fulfilling the people’s expectations, our
agenda for the next year is : “Transform, Energise and Clean India”, that is,
TEC India. This agenda of TEC India seeks to


Transform the quality of governance and quality of life of our
people;

8



Energise various sections of society, especially the youth and
the vulnerable, and enable them to unleash their true
potential; and
Clean the country from the evils of corruption, black money
and non-transparent political funding.

I propose to present my Budget proposals under ten distinct themes to
foster this broad agenda. The themes are :

I.

(i)

Farmers : for whom we have committed to double the income
in 5 years;

(ii)

Rural Population : providing employment and basic
infrastructure;

(iii)

Youth : energising them through education, skills and jobs;

(iv)

Poor and the Underprivileged : strengthening the systems of
social security, health care and affordable housing;

(v)

Infrastructure: for efficiency, productivity and quality of life;

(vi)

Financial Sector : growth and stability through stronger
institutions;

(vii)

Digital Economy : for speed, accountability and transparency;

(viii)

Public Service : effective governance and efficient service
delivery through people’s participation;

(ix)

Prudent Fiscal Management : to ensure optimal deployment
of resources and preserve fiscal stability; and

(x)

Tax Administration : honouring the honest.

FARMERS

20.
The Indian farmer has once again shown his commitment and
resilience in the current year. The total area sown under kharif and rabi
seasons are higher than the previous year. With a better monsoon,
agriculture is expected to grow at 4.1% in the current year.
21.
In last year’s Budget speech, I focused on ‘income security’ of
farmers to double their income in 5 years. I had also announced a number
of measures. We have to take more steps and enable the farmers to
increase their production and productivity; and to deal with post-harvest
challenges.

9
22.
For a good crop, adequate credit should be available to farmers in
time. The target for agricultural credit in 2017-18 has been fixed at a record
level of ` 10 lakh crores. We will take special efforts to ensure adequate
flow of credit to the under serviced areas, the Eastern States and Jammu &
Kashmir. The farmers will also benefit from 60 days’ interest waiver
announced by Honourable Prime Minister in respect of their loans from the
cooperative credit structure.
23.
About 40% of the small and marginal farmers avail credit from the
cooperative structure. The Primary Agriculture Credit Societies (PACS) act
as the front end for loan disbursements. We will support NABARD for
computerisation and integration of all 63,000 functional PACS with the Core
Banking System of District Central Cooperative Banks. This will be done in 3
years at an estimated cost of ` 1,900 crores, with financial participation
from State Governments. This will ensure seamless flow of credit to small
and marginal farmers.
24.
At the time of sowing, farmers should feel secure against natural
calamities. The Fasal Bima Yojana launched by our Government is a major
step in this direction. The coverage of this scheme will be increased from
30% of cropped area in 2016-17 to 40% in 2017-18 and 50% in 2018-19.
The Budget provision of ` 5,500 crores for this Yojana in BE 2016-17 was
increased to ` 13,240 crores in RE 2016-17 to settle the arrear claims. For
2017-18, I have provided a sum of ` 9,000 crores. The sum insured under
this Yojana has more than doubled from ` 69,000 crores in Kharif 2015 to
` 1,41,625 crores in Kharif 2016.
25.
Issuance of Soil Health Cards has gathered momentum. The real
benefit to farmers would be available only when the soil samples are tested
quickly and nutrient level of the soil is known. Government will therefore
set up new mini labs in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and ensure 100%
coverage of all 648 KVKs in the country. In addition, 1000 mini labs will be
set up by qualified local entrepreneurs. Government will provide credit
linked subsidy to these entrepreneurs.
26.
A Long Term Irrigation Fund has already been set up in NABARD.
Honourable Prime Minister has announced an addition of ` 20,000 crores to
its corpus. This will take the total corpus of this Fund to ` 40,000 crores.
27.
A dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund will be set up in NABARD to
achieve the goal, ‘per drop more crop’. The Fund will have an initial corpus
of `5,000 crores.

10
28.
For the post-harvest phase, we will take steps to enable farmers to
get better prices for their produce in the markets. The coverage of National
Agricultural Market (e-NAM) will be expanded from the current 250
markets to 585 APMCs. Assistance up to a ceiling of ` 75 lakhs will be
provided to every e-NAM market for establishment of cleaning, grading and
packaging facilities. This will lead to value addition of farmers’ produce.
29.
Market reforms will be undertaken and the States would be urged to
denotify perishables from APMC. This will give opportunity to farmers to
sell their produce and get better prices.
30.
We also propose to integrate farmers who grow fruits and
vegetables with agro processing units for better price realisation and
reduction of post-harvest losses. A model law on contract farming would
therefore be prepared and circulated among the States for adoption.
31.
Dairy is an important source of additional income for the farmers.
Availability of milk processing facility and other infrastructure will benefit
the farmers through value addition. A large number of milk processing
units set up under the Operation Flood Programme has since become old
and obsolete. A Dairy Processing and Infrastructure Development Fund
would be set up in NABARD with a corpus of ` 8,000 crores over 3 years.
Initially, the Fund will start with a corpus of ` 2,000 crores.
II.

RURAL POPULATION

32.
I now turn to the Rural Sector, which was so dear to the heart of
Mahatma Gandhi.
33.
Over ` 3 lakh crores are spent in rural areas every year, if we add up
all the programmes meant for rural poor from the Central Budget, State
Budgets, Bank linkage for self-help groups, etc. With a clear focus on
improving accountability, outcomes and convergence, we will undertake a
Mission Antyodaya to bring one crore households out of poverty and to
make 50,000 gram panchayats poverty free by 2019, the 150 th birth
anniversary of Gandhiji. We will utilise the existing resources more
effectively along with annual increases. This mission will work with a
focused micro plan for sustainable livelihood for every deprived household.
A composite index for poverty free gram panchayats would be developed to
monitor the progress from the baseline.

11
34.
Our Government has made a conscious effort to reorient MGNREGA
to support our resolve to double farmers’ income. While providing at least
100 days employment to every rural household, MGNREGA should create
productive assets to improve farm productivity and incomes. The target of
5 lakh farm ponds and 10 lakh compost pits announced in the last Budget
from MGNREGA funds will be fully achieved. In fact, against 5 lakh farm
ponds, it is expected that about 10 lakh farm ponds would be completed by
March 2017. During 2017-18, another 5 lakh farm ponds will be taken up.
This single measure will contribute greatly to drought proofing of gram
panchayats.
35.
Participation of women in MGNREGA has increased to 55% from
less than 48% in the past.
36.
Honourable Members would be happy to note that the budget
provision of `38,500 crores under MGNREGA in 2016-17 has been increased
to `48,000 crores in 2017-18. This is the highest ever allocation for
MGNREGA. The initiative to geo-tag all MGNREGA assets and putting them
in public domain has established greater transparency. We are also using
space technology in a big way to plan MGNREGA works.
37.
The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) is now being
implemented as never before. The pace of construction of PMGSY roads
has accelerated to reach 133 km roads per day in 2016-17, as against an
average of 73 km during the period 2011-2014. We have also taken up the
task of connecting habitations with more than 100 persons in left wing
extremism affected Blocks. We have committed to complete the current
target under PMGSY by 2019. I have provided a sum of ` 19,000 crores in
2017-18 for this scheme. Together with the contribution of States, an
amount of ` 27,000 crores will be spent on PMGSY in 2017-18.
38.
We propose to complete 1 crore houses by 2019 for the
houseless and those living in kutcha houses. I have stepped up the
allocation for Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin from ` 15,000 crores
in BE 2016-17 to ` 23,000 crores in 2017-18.
39.
We are well on our way to achieving 100% village electrification by
st
1 May 2018. An increased allocation of ` 4,814 crores has been proposed
under the Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana in 2017-18.
40.
I have also proposed to increase the allocations for Deendayal
Antyodaya Yojana- National Rural Livelihood Mission for promotion of skill
development and livelihood opportunities for people in rural areas to

12
`4,500 in 2017-18.

The allocation for Prime Minister's Employment
Generation Programme (PMEGP) and credit support schemes has been
increased more than 3 times.
41.
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) has made tremendous progress in
promoting safe sanitation and ending open defecation. Sanitation coverage
in rural India has gone up from 42% in October 2014 to about 60%. Open
Defecation Free villages are now being given priority for piped water supply.
42.
We propose to provide safe drinking water to over 28,000 arsenic
and fluoride affected habitations in the next four years. This will be a sub
mission of the National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP).
43.
For imparting new skills to the people in the rural areas, mason
training will be provided to 5 lakh persons by 2022, with an immediate
target of training at least 20,000 persons by 2017-18.
44.
Panchayati raj institutions still lack human resources for
implementing development programmes. A programme of “human
resource reforms for results” will be launched during 2017-18 for this
purpose.
45.
The Government will continue to work closely with the farmers and
the people in the rural areas to improve their life and environment. This is a
non-negotiable agenda for our Government. The total allocation for the
rural, agriculture and allied sectors in 2017-18 is ` 1,87,223 crores, which is
24% higher than the previous year.
III.

YOUTH

46.

Let me now focus on my proposals for the youth.

47.
Quality education will energise our youth. In the words of Swami
Vivekananda, “The education which does not help the common mass of
people to equip themselves for the struggle for life ………… is it worth the
name?”
48.
We have proposed to introduce a system of measuring annual
learning outcomes in our schools. Emphasis will be given on science
education and flexibility in curriculum to promote creativity through local
innovative content.

13
49.
An Innovation Fund for Secondary Education will be created to
encourage local innovation for ensuring universal access, gender parity and
quality improvement. This will include ICT enabled learning transformation.
The focus will be on 3479 educationally backward blocks.
50.
In higher education, we will undertake reforms in the UGC. Good
quality institutions would be enabled to have greater administrative and
academic autonomy. Colleges will be identified based on accreditation and
ranking, and given autonomous status. A revised framework will be put in
place for outcome based accreditation and credit based programmes.
51.
We propose to leverage information technology and launch
SWAYAM platform with at least 350 online courses. This would enable
students to virtually attend the courses taught by the best faculty; access
high quality reading resources; participate in discussion forums; take tests
and earn academic grades. Access to SWAYAM would be widened by
linkage with DTH channels, dedicated to education.
52.
We propose to establish a National Testing Agency as an
autonomous and self-sustained premier testing organisation to conduct all
entrance examinations for higher education institutions. This would free
CBSE, AICTE and other premier institutions from these administrative
responsibilities so that they can focus more on academics.
53.
We have a huge demographic advantage. Skill India mission was
launched in July 2015 to maximise the potential of our youth.
54.
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendras (PMKK) have already been
promoted in more than 60 districts. We now propose to extend these
Kendras to more than 600 districts across the country. 100 India
International Skills Centres will be established across the country. These
Centres would offer advanced training and also courses in foreign
languages. This will help those of our youth who seek job opportunities
outside the country.
55.
In 2017-18, we also propose to launch the Skill Acquisition and
Knowledge Awareness for Livelihood Promotion programme (SANKALP) at a
cost of ` 4,000 crores. SANKALP will provide market relevant training to 3.5
crore youth.

14

56.
The next phase of Skill Strengthening for Industrial Value
Enhancement (STRIVE) will also be launched in 2017-18 at a cost of ` 2,200
crores. STRIVE will focus on improving the quality and market relevance of
vocational training provided in ITIs and strengthen the apprenticeship
programmes through industry cluster approach.
57.
A special scheme for creating employment in the textile sector has
already been launched. A similar scheme will be implemented for the
leather and footwear industries.
58.
Tourism is a big employment generator and has a multiplier impact
on the economy. Five Special Tourism Zones, anchored on SPVs, will be set
up in partnership with the States. Incredible India 2.0 Campaign will be
launched across the world.
IV.

THE POOR AND THE UNDERPRIVILEGED

59.
Madam Speaker, I now turn to my proposals for the poor and the
underprivileged.
60.
Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas begins with the girl child and women.
Mahila Shakti Kendra will be set up at village level with an allocation of
` 500 crores in 14 lakh ICDS Anganwadi Centres. This will provide one stop
convergent support services for empowering rural women with
opportunities for skill development, employment, digital literacy, health
and nutrition. A nationwide scheme for financial assistance to pregnant
women has already been announced by Honourable Prime Minister on 31 st
December, 2016. Under this scheme, ` 6,000 each will be transferred
directly to the bank accounts of pregnant women who undergo institutional
delivery and vaccinate their children.
61.
For the welfare of Women and Children under various schemes
across all Ministries, I have stepped up the allocation from ` 1,56,528 crores
in BE 2016-17 to ` 1,84,632 crores in 2017-18.
62.
We propose to facilitate higher investment in affordable housing.
Affordable housing will now be given infrastructure status, which will
enable these projects to avail the associated benefits.

15
63.
The National Housing Bank will refinance individual housing loans of
about ` 20,000 crore in 2017-18. Thanks to the surplus liquidity created by
demonetisation, the Banks have already started reducing their lending
rates, including those for housing. In addition, interest subvention for
housing loans has also been announced by the Honourable Prime Minister.
64.
Poverty is usually associated with poor health. It is the poor who
suffer the maximum from various chronic diseases. Government has
therefore prepared an action plan to eliminate Kala-Azar and Filariasis by
2017, Leprosy by 2018 and Measles by 2020. Elimination of tuberculosis by
2025 is also targeted. Similarly, action plan has been prepared to reduce
IMR from 39 in 2014 to 28 by 2019 and MMR from 167 in 2011-13 to 100
by 2018-2020. 1.5 lakh Health Sub Centres will be transformed into Health
and Wellness Centres.
65.
We need to ensure adequate availability of specialist doctors to
strengthen Secondary and Tertiary levels of health care. We have therefore
decided to take steps to create additional 5,000 Post Graduate seats per
annum. In addition, steps will be taken to roll out DNB courses in big
District Hospitals; strengthen PG teaching in select ESI and Municipal
Corporation Hospitals; and encourage reputed Private Hospitals to start
DNB courses. We will work with the State Governments to take these tasks
forward. The Government is committed to take necessary steps for
structural transformation of the Regulatory framework of Medical
Education and Practice in India.
66.
Two new All India Institutes of Medical Sciences will be set up in the
States of Jharkhand and Gujarat.
67.
We propose to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules to ensure
availability of drugs at reasonable prices and promote use of generic
medicines. New rules for regulating medical devices will also be formulated.
These rules will be internationally harmonised and attract investment into
this sector. This will reduce the cost of such devices.
68.
We are keen on fostering a conducive labour environment wherein
labour rights are protected and harmonious labour relations lead to higher
productivity. Legislative reforms will be undertaken to simplify, rationalise
and amalgamate the existing labour laws into 4 Codes on (i) wages; (ii)
industrial relations; (iii) social security and welfare; and (iv) safety and
working conditions. The Model Shops and Establishment Bill 2016 has been
circulated to all States for consideration and adoption. This would open up
additional avenues for employment of women. The amendment made to

16
the Payment of Wages Act, is another initiative of our Government for the
benefit of the labour and ease of doing business.
69.
Our Government is giving special importance to implementation of
the schemes for welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Minorities. The allocation for the welfare of Scheduled Castes has been
stepped up from `38,833 crores in BE 2016-17 to ` 52,393 crores in
2017-18, representing an increase of about 35%. The allocation for
Scheduled Tribes has been increased to `31,920 crores and for Minority
Affairs to `4,195 crores. The Government will introduce outcome based
monitoring of expenditure in these sectors by the NITI Aayog.
70.
For senior citizens, Aadhar based Smart Cards containing their
health details will be introduced. A beginning will be made through a pilot
in 15 districts during 2017-18. The LIC will implement a scheme for senior
citizens to provide assured pension, with a guaranteed return of 8% per
annum for 10 years.
V.

INFRASTRUCTURE

71.

The fifth component of TEC India agenda is Infrastructure.

72.
Railways, roads and rivers are the lifeline of our country. I feel
privileged to present the first combined Budget of independent India that
includes the Railways also. We are now in a position to synergise the
investments in railways, roads, waterways and civil aviation. For 2017-18,
the total capital and development expenditure of Railways has been pegged
at ` 1,31,000 crores. This includes ` 55,000 crores provided by the
Government.
73.
Among other things, the Railways will focus on four major areas,
namely :
(i)

Passenger safety;

(ii)

Capital and development works;

(iii)

Cleanliness; and

(iv)

Finance and accounting reforms.

74.
For passenger safety, a Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh will be created
with a corpus of ` 1 lakh crores over a period of 5 years. Besides seed

17
capital from the Government, the Railways will arrange the balance
resources from their own revenues and other sources. Government will lay
down clear cut guidelines and timeline for implementing various safety
works to be funded from this Kosh. Unmanned level crossings on Broad
Gauge lines will be eliminated by 2020. Expert international assistance will
be harnessed to improve safety preparedness and maintenance practices.
75.
In the next 3 years, the throughput is proposed to be enhanced by
10%. This will be done through modernisation and upgradation of
identified corridors. Railway lines of 3,500 kms will be commissioned in
2017-18, as against 2,800 kms in 2016-17. Steps will be taken to launch
dedicated trains for tourism and pilgrimage.
76.
Railways have set up joint ventures with 9 State Governments. 70
projects have been identified for construction and development.
77.
A beginning has been made with regard to station redevelopment.
At least 25 stations are expected to be awarded during 2017-18 for station
redevelopment. 500 stations will be made differently abled friendly by
providing lifts and escalators.
78.
It is proposed to feed about 7,000 stations with solar power in the
medium term. A beginning has already been made in 300 stations. Works
will be taken up for 2,000 railway stations as part of 1000 MW solar
mission.
79.
Our focus is on swachh rail. SMS based Clean My Coach Service has
been started. It is now proposed to introduce ‘Coach Mitra’ facility, a single
window interface, to register all coach related complaints and
requirements. By 2019, all coaches of Indian Railways will be fitted with bio
toilets. Pilot plants for environment friendly disposal of solid waste and
conversion of biodegradable waste to energy are being set up at New Delhi
and Jaipur railway stations. Five more such solid waste management plants
are now being taken up.
80.
Today Indian Railways face stiff competition from other modes of
transportation which are dominated by the private sector. Transformative
measures have to be undertaken to make Indian Railways competitive to
retain their position of pre-eminence. The following steps will therefore be
taken :
(i)

Railways will implement end to end integrated transport
solutions for select commodities through partnership with

18
logistics players, who would provide both front and back end
connectivity. Rolling stocks and practices will be customised to
transport perishable goods, especially agricultural products.
(ii)

Railways will offer competitive ticket booking facility to the
public at large. Service charge on e-tickets booked through IRCTC
has been withdrawn. Cashless reservations have gone up from
58% to 68%.

(iii)

As part of accounting reforms, accrual based financial
statements will be rolled out by March 2019.

81.
It will be our continuous endeavour to improve the Operating Ratio
of the Railways. The tariffs of Railways would be fixed, taking into
consideration costs, quality of service, social obligations and competition
from other forms of transport.
82.
Metro rail is emerging as an important mode of urban
transportation. A new Metro Rail Policy will be announced with focus on
innovative models of implementation and financing, as well as
standardisation and indigenisation of hardware and software. This will
open up new job opportunities for our youth.
83.
A new Metro Rail Act will be enacted by rationalising the existing
laws. This will facilitate greater private participation and investment in
construction and operation.
84.
In the road sector, I have stepped up the Budget allocation for
highways from ` 57,976 crores in BE 2016-17 to ` 64,900 crores in 2017-18.
2,000 kms of coastal connectivity roads have been identified for
construction and development. This will facilitate better connectivity with
ports and remote villages. The total length of roads, including those under
PMGSY, built from 2014-15 till the current year is about 1,40,000 kms which
is significantly higher than previous three years.
85.
An effective multi modal logistics and transport sector will make our
economy more competitive. A specific programme for development of
multi-modal logistics parks, together with multi modal transport facilities,
will be drawn up and implemented.
86.
Select airports in Tier 2 cities will be taken up for operation and
maintenance in the PPP mode. Airport Authority of India Act will be

19
amended to enable effective monetisation of land assets. The resources, so
raised, will be utilised for airport upgradation.
87.
For transportation sector as a whole, including rail, roads, shipping, I
have provided ` 2,41,387 crores in 2017-18. This magnitude of investment
will spur a huge amount of economic activity across the country and create
more job opportunities.
88.
Telecom sector is an important component of our infrastructure eco
system. The recent spectrum auctions have removed spectrum scarcity in
the country. This will give a major fillip to mobile broadband and Digital
India for the benefit of people living in rural and remote areas.
89.
Under the BharatNet Project, OFC has been laid in 1,55,000 kms. I
have stepped up the allocation for BharatNet Project to ` 10,000 crores in
2017-18. By the end of 2017-18, high speed broadband connectivity on
optical fibre will be available in more than 1,50,000 gram panchayats, with
wifi hot spots and access to digital services at low tariffs. A DigiGaon
initiative will be launched to provide tele-medicine, education and skills
through digital technology.
90.
For strengthening our Energy sector, Government has decided to set
up Strategic Crude Oil Reserves. In the first phase, 3 such Reserves facilities
have been set up. Now in the second phase, it is proposed to set up caverns
at 2 more locations, namely, Chandikhole in Odisha and Bikaner in
Rajasthan. This will take our strategic reserve capacity to 15.33 MMT.
91.
In solar energy, we now propose to take up the second phase of
Solar Park development for additional 20,000 MW capacity.
92.
We are also creating an eco-system to make India a global hub for
electronics manufacturing. Over 250 investment proposals for electronics
manufacturing have been received in the last 2 years, totalling an
investment of ` 1.26 lakh crores. A number of global leaders and mobile
manufacturers have set up production facilities in India. I have therefore
exponentially increased the allocation for incentive schemes like M-SIPS and
EDF to ` 745 crores in 2017-18. This is an all-time high.
93.
We have to focus on our export infrastructure in a competitive
world.
A new and restructured Central scheme, namely, Trade
Infrastructure for Export Scheme (TIES) will be launched in 2017-18.

20
94.
The total allocation for infrastructure development in 2017-18
stands at `3,96,135 crores.
VI.

FINANCIAL SECTOR

95.
I now turn to the Financial Sector. The focus of TEC India agenda in
this sector is on building stable and stronger institutions. We will continue
with our reform agenda with several new measures.
96.
Our Government has already undertaken substantive reforms in FDI
policy in the last two years. More than 90% of the total FDI inflows are now
through the automatic route. The Foreign Investment Promotion Board
(FIPB) has successfully implemented e-filing and online processing of FDI
applications. We have now reached a stage where FIPB can be phased out.
We have therefore decided to abolish the FIPB in 2017-18. A roadmap for
the same will be announced in the next few months. In the meantime,
further liberalisation of FDI policy is under consideration and necessary
announcements will be made in due course.
97.
The Commodities markets require further reforms for the benefits of
farmers. An expert committee will be constituted to study and promote
creation of an operational and legal framework to integrate spot market
and derivatives market for commodities trading. e-NAM would be an
integral part of such framework.
98.
The draft bill to curtail the menace of illicit deposit schemes has
been placed in the public domain and will be introduced shortly after its
finalisation. There is an urgent need to protect the poor and gullible
investors from another set of dubious schemes, operated by unscrupulous
entities who exploit the regulatory gaps in the Multi State Cooperative
Societies Act, 2002. We will amend this Act in consultation with various
stakeholders, as part of our ‘Clean India’ agenda.
99.
The bill relating to resolution of financial firms will be introduced in
the current Budget Session of Parliament. This will contribute to stability
and resilience of our financial system. It will also protect the consumers of
various financial institutions. Together with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, a resolution mechanism for financial firms will ensure
comprehensiveness of the resolution system in our country.
100. I had stated in my last Budget speech that a Bill will be introduced to
streamline institutional arrangements for resolution of disputes in
infrastructure related construction contracts, PPP and public utility

21
contracts. After extensive stakeholders’ consultations, we have decided
that the required mechanism would be instituted as part of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act 1996. An amendment Bill will be introduced in this
regard.
101. Cyber security is critical for safeguarding the integrity and stability of
our financial sector. A Computer Emergency Response Team for our
Financial Sector (CERT-Fin) will be established. This entity will work in close
coordination with all financial sector regulators and other stakeholders.
102. I have also proposed several other measures in the financial sector
which are listed in Annex I.
103. Listing of Public Sector enterprises will foster greater public
accountability and unlock the true value of these companies. The
Government will put in place a revised mechanism and procedure to ensure
time bound listing of identified CPSEs on stock exchanges. The
disinvestment policy announced by me in the last budget will continue.
104. The shares of Railway PSEs like IRCTC, IRFC and IRCON will be listed
in stock exchanges.
105. We see opportunities to strengthen our CPSEs through
consolidation, mergers and acquisitions. By these methods, the CPSEs can
be integrated across the value chain of an industry. It will give them
capacity to bear higher risks, avail economies of scale, take higher
investment decisions and create more value for the stakeholders.
Possibilities of such restructuring are visible in the oil and gas sector. We
propose to create an integrated public sector ‘oil major’ which will be able
to match the performance of international and domestic private sector oil
and gas companies.
106. Our ETF, comprising shares of ten CPSEs, has received overwhelming
response in the recent Further Fund Offering (FFO). We will continue to use
ETF as a vehicle for further disinvestment of shares. Accordingly, a new ETF
with diversified CPSE stocks and other Government holdings will be
launched in 2017-18.
107. The focus on resolution of stressed legacy accounts of Banks
continues. The legal framework has been strengthened to facilitate
resolution, through the enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
and the amendments to the SARFAESI and Debt Recovery Tribunal Acts. In
line with the ‘Indradhanush’ roadmap, I have provided ` 10,000 crores for

22
recapitalisation of Banks in 2017-18. Additional allocation will be provided,
as may be required.
108. Listing and trading of Security Receipts issued by a securitization
company or a reconstruction company under the SARFAESI Act will be
permitted in SEBI registered stock exchanges. This will enhance capital flows
into the securitization industry and will particularly be helpful to deal with
bank NPAs.
109. The Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana has contributed significantly to
funding the unfunded and the underfunded. Last year, the target of ` 1.22
lakh crores was exceeded. For 2017-18, I propose to double the lending
target of 2015-16 and set it at ` 2.44 lakh crores. Priority will be given to
Dalits, Tribals, Backward Classes, Minorities and Women.
110. The Stand Up India scheme was launched by our Government in
April 2016 to support Dalit, Tribal and Women entrepreneurs to set up
greenfield enterprises and become job creators. Over 16,000 new
enterprises have come up through this scheme in activities, as diverse as
food processing, garments, diagnostic centres, etc.
VII.

DIGITAL ECONOMY

111. Promotion of a digital economy is an integral part of Government’s
strategy to clean the system and weed out corruption and black money. It
has a transformative impact in terms of greater formalisation of the
economy and mainstreaming of financial savings into the banking system.
This, in turn, is expected to energise private investment in the country
through lower cost of credit. India is now on the cusp of a massive digital
revolution.
112. A shift to digital payments has huge benefits for the common man.
The earlier initiative of our Government to promote financial inclusion and
the JAM trinity were important precursors to our current push for digital
transactions.
113. Already there is evidence of increased digital transactions. The
BHIM app has been launched. It will unleash the power of mobile phones
for digital payments and financial inclusion. 125 lakh people have adopted
the BHIM app so far. The Government will launch two new schemes to
promote the usage of BHIM; these are, Referral Bonus Scheme for
individuals and a Cashback Scheme for merchants.

23

114. Aadhar Pay, a merchant version of Aadhar Enabled Payment System,
will be launched shortly. This will be specifically beneficial for those who do
not have debit cards, mobile wallets and mobile phones. A Mission will be
set up with a target of 2,500 crore digital transactions for 2017-18 through
UPI, USSD, Aadhar Pay, IMPS and debit cards. Banks have targeted to
introduce additional 10 lakh new PoS terminals by March 2017. They will
be encouraged to introduce 20 lakh Aadhar based PoS by September 2017.
115. Increased digital transactions will enable small and micro enterprises
to access formal credit. Government will encourage SIDBI to refinance
credit institutions which provide unsecured loans, at reasonable interest
rates, to borrowers based on their transaction history.
116. The digital payment infrastructure and grievance handling
mechanisms shall be strengthened. The focus would be on rural and semi
urban areas through Post Offices, Fair Price Shops and Banking
Correspondents. Steps would be taken to promote and possibly mandate
petrol pumps, fertilizer depots, municipalities, Block offices, road transport
offices, universities, colleges, hospitals and other institutions to have
facilities for digital payments, including BHIM App. A proposal to mandate
all Government receipts through digital means, beyond a prescribed limit, is
under consideration.
117. Government will strengthen the Financial Inclusion Fund to augment
resources for taking up these initiatives.
118. Government will consider and work with various stakeholders for
early implementation of the interim recommendations of the Committee of
Chief Ministers on digital transactions.
119. The Committee on Digital Payments constituted by Department of
Economic Affairs has recommended structural reforms in the payment eco
system, including amendments to the Payment and Settlement Systems Act,
2007. Government will undertake a comprehensive review of this Act and
bring about appropriate amendments. To begin with, it is proposed to
create a Payments Regulatory Board in the Reserve Bank of India by
replacing the existing Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and
Settlement Systems. Necessary amendments are proposed to this effect in
the Finance Bill 2017.
120. As we move faster on the path of digital transactions and cheque
payments, we need to ensure that the payees of dishonoured cheques are

24
able to realise the payments. Government is therefore considering the
option of amending the Negotiable Instruments Act suitably.
VIII.

PUBLIC SERVICE

121. I now turn to Public Service. Our focus here is on effective
government and efficient service delivery.
122. We have made a strong beginning with regard to Direct Benefit
Transfer (DBT) to LPG and kerosene consumers. Chandigarh and eight
districts of Haryana have become kerosene free. 84 Government schemes
have also boarded on the DBT platform.
123. The Government e-market place which is now functional for
procurement of goods and services, has been selected as one of the
winners of the South Asia Procurement Innovation Awards of the World
Bank.
124. Our citizens in far flung regions of the country find it difficult to
obtain passports and redress passport related grievances. We have decided
to utilise the Head Post Offices as front offices for rendering passport
services.
125. Our defence forces keep the country safe from both external and
internal threats. A Centralised Defence Travel System has now been
developed through which travel tickets can be booked online by our
soldiers and officers. They do not have to face the hassle of standing in
queues with railway warrants.
126. A comprehensive web based interactive Pension Disbursement
System for Defence Pensioners will be established. This system will receive
pension proposals and make payments centrally. This will reduce the
grievances of defence pensioners.
127. At present our citizens, especially those belonging to the poor and
unprivileged sections, go through cumbersome procedures of Government
recruitment. There are multiplicity of agencies and examinations. We
propose to introduce a system of single registration and two tier system of
examination.

25
128. Over the years, the number of tribunals have multiplied with
overlapping functions. We propose to rationalise the number of tribunals
and merge tribunals wherever appropriate.
129. In the recent past, there have been instances of big time offenders,
including economic offenders, fleeing the country to escape the reach of
law. We have to ensure that the law is allowed to take its own course.
Government is therefore considering introduction of legislative changes, or
even a new law, to confiscate the assets of such persons located within the
country, till they submit to the jurisdiction of the appropriate legal forum.
Needless to say that all necessary constitutional safeguards will be followed
in such cases.
130. Our Government will continue to remain committed to improve the
standards of public service and transparent governance. Service to the
people was the life-long commitment of the Father of the Nation, Mahatma
Gandhi. As we approach, the 150th Birth Anniversary of the Mahatma, we
will take all steps to celebrate it in a befitting manner. A High Level
Committee under the Chairmanship of Honourable Prime Minister is
proposed to be set up for the same. We will also commemorate the
centenary year of Champaran Satyagrah this year. Government of India will
support Government of Gujarat to commemorate 100 years of Sabarmati
Ashram in 2017, in a befitting manner. 200 years ago in 1817, a valiant
uprising of soldiers led by Buxi Jagabandhu took place in Khordha of
Odisha. We will commemorate the same appropriately.
IX.

PRUDENT FISCAL MANAGEMENT

131. I now turn to the fiscal situation in the context of the Budget for
2017-18.
132. The total expenditure in Budget for 2017-18 has been placed at
`21.47 lakh crores. With the abolition of Plan-Non Plan classification of
expenditure, the focus is now on Revenue and Capital expenditure. I have
stepped up the allocation for Capital expenditure by 25.4% over the
previous year. This will have multiplier effects and lead to higher growth.
The total resources being transferred to the States and the Union Territories
with Legislatures is ` 4.11 lakh crores, against ` 3.60 lakh crores in BE 201617. Details of allocations for important sectors and schemes and transfer of
resources to States are given in Annex II of my Speech.
133. I have made a provision of ` 3,000 crores under the Department of
Economic Affairs to implement various Budget announcements and other

26
new schemes in 2017-18. For Defence expenditure excluding pensions, I
have provided a sum of ` 2,74,114 crores including ` 86,488 crores for
Defence capital. I have increased the allocation for Scientific Ministries to
` 37,435 crore in 2017-18.
134. For the first time, a consolidated Outcome Budget, covering all
Ministries and Departments, is being laid along with the other Budget
documents. This will improve accountability of Government expenditure.
135. The FRBM Review Committee has given its report recently. The
Committee has done an elaborate exercise and has recommended that a
sustainable debt path must be the principal macro-economic anchor of our
fiscal policy. The Committee has favoured Debt to GDP of 60% for the
General Government by 2023, consisting of 40% for Central Government
and 20% for State Governments. Within this framework, the Committee
has derived and recommended 3% fiscal deficit for the next three years.
The Committee has also provided for ‘Escape Clauses’, for deviations upto
0.5% of GDP, from the stipulated fiscal deficit target. Among the triggers
for taking recourse to these Escape Clauses, the Committee has included
“far-reaching structural reforms in the economy with unanticipated fiscal
implications” as one of the factors. Although there is a strong case now to
invoke this Escape Clause, I am refraining from doing so. The Report of the
Committee will be carefully examined and appropriate decisions taken in
due course.
136. Nevertheless, I take note of the fiscal deficit roadmap of 3%
recommended by the Committee for the next three years. I have taken into
consideration the need for higher public expenditure in the context of
sluggish private sector investment and slow global growth. I have kept in
mind the recommendation of the Committee that a sustainable debt should
be the underlying basis of prudent fiscal management. Considering all
these aspects, I have pegged the fiscal deficit for 2017-18 at 3.2% of GDP
and remain committed to achieve 3% in the following year. With this
gradual approach, I have ensured adherence to fiscal consolidation, without
compromising the requirements of public investment.
137. I have taken due care to limit the net market borrowing of
Government to ` 3.48 lakh crores after buyback, much lower than ` 4.25
lakh crores of the previous year. More importantly, the Revenue Deficit of
2.3% in BE 2016-17 stands reduced to 2.1% in the Revised Estimates. The
Revenue Deficit for next year is pegged at 1.9% , against 2% mandated by
the FRBM Act.

27
138. It will be our endeavour to improve upon these fiscal numbers,
especially the fiscal deficit, in the next year, through greater focus on
quality of expenditure and higher tax realisation from the huge cash
deposits in Banks, triggered by demonetisation.

28
PART B
Madam Speaker,
139.

I shall now present my tax proposals:

140. India’s tax to GDP ratio is very low, and the proportion of direct tax
to indirect tax is not optimal from the view point of social justice. I place
before you certain data to indicate that our direct tax collection is not
commensurate with the income and consumption pattern of Indian
economy. As against estimated 4.2 crore persons engaged in organised
sector employment, the number of individuals filing return for salary
income are only 1.74 crore. As against 5.6 crore informal sector individual
enterprises and firms doing small business in India, the number of returns
filed by this category are only 1.81 crore. Out of the 13.94 lakh companies
registered in India upto 31st March, 2014, 5.97 lakh companies have filed
their returns for Assessment Year 2016-17. Of the 5.97 lakh companies
which have filed their returns for Assessment Year 2016-17 so far, as many
as 2.76 lakh companies have shown losses or zero income. 2.85 lakh
companies have shown profit before tax of less than ` 1 crore. 28,667
companies have shown profit between ` 1 crore to ` 10 crore, and only
7781 companies have profit before tax of more than ` 10 crores.
141. Among the 3.7 crore individuals who filed the tax returns in
2015-16, 99 lakh show income below the exemption limit of ` 2.5 lakh p.a.,
1.95 crore show income between ` 2.5 to ` 5 lakh, 52 lakh show income
between ` 5 to ` 10 lakhs and only 24 lakh people show income above ` 10
lakhs. Of the 76 lakh individual assesses who declare income above ` 5
lakh, 56 lakh are in the salaried class. The number of people showing
income more than ` 50 lakh in the entire country is only 1.72 lakh. We can
contrast this with the fact that in the last five years, more than 1.25 crore
cars have been sold, and number of Indian citizens who flew abroad, either
for business or tourism, is 2 crore in the year 2015. From all these figures
we can conclude that we are largely a tax non-compliant society. The
predominance of cash in the economy makes it possible for the people to
evade their taxes. When too many people evade taxes, the burden of their
share falls on those who are honest and compliant.
142. After the demonetisation, the preliminary analysis of data received
in respect of deposits made by people in old currency presents a revealing
picture. During the period 8th November to 30th December 2016, deposits
between ` 2 lakh and ` 80 lakh were made in about 1.09 crore accounts
with an average deposit size of ` 5.03 lakh. Deposits of more than 80 lakh
were made in 1.48 lakh accounts with average deposit size of ` 3.31 crores.

29
This data mining will help us immensely in expanding the tax net as well as
increasing the revenues, which was one of the objectives of
demonetisation.
143. Madam Speaker, one of the main priorities of our Government is to
eliminate the black money component from the economy. We are
committed to make our taxation rates more reasonable, our tax
administration more fair and expand the tax base in the country. This
approach will change the colour of money.

xÉ<Ç nÖÉÊxÉªÉÉ cè, xÉªÉÉ nÉè® cè, xÉªÉÉÒ cè =àÉÆMÉ
BÉÖEU lÉä {ÉcãÉä BÉäE iÉ®ÉÒBÉäE, iÉÉä cé BÉÖEU +ÉÉVÉ BÉäE fÆMÉ
®Éä¶ÉxÉÉÒ +ÉÉBÉäE +ÉÆvÉä®Éå ºÉä VÉÉä ]BÉE®ÉªÉÉÒ cè
BÉEÉãÉä vÉxÉ BÉEÉä £ÉÉÒ ¤ÉnãÉxÉÉ {É½É, +ÉÉVÉ +É{ÉxÉÉ ®ÆMÉ
144. The net tax revenue of 2013-14 was ` 11.38 lakh crores. This grew
by 9.4% in 2014-15 and 17% in 2015-16. As per the RE of 2016-17, we will
end the year with a high growth rate of 17% for the second year in a row.
Because of the serious efforts made by the Government, the rate of growth
of advance tax in personal income tax in the first three quarters of the
current financial is 34.8%.
145. Madam Speaker, the thrust of my tax proposals in this Budget is
stimulating growth, relief to middle class, affordable housing, curbing black
money, promoting digital economy, transparency of political funding and
simplification of tax administration.
Measures for Promoting Affordable Housing and Real Estate Sector
146. In my budget proposals last year, I had announced a scheme for
profit-linked income tax exemption for promoters of affordable housing
scheme which has received a very good response. However, in order to
make this scheme more attractive, I propose certain changes in the scheme.
First of all, instead of built up area of 30 and 60 sq.mtr., the carpet area of
30 and 60 sq.mtr. will be counted. Also the 30 sq.mtr. limit will apply only
in case of municipal limits of 4 metropolitan cities while for the rest of the
country including in the peripheral areas of metros, limit of 60 sq.mtr. will
apply. In order to be eligible, the scheme was to be completed in 3 years
after commencement. I propose to extend this period to 5 years.
147. At present, the houses which are unoccupied after getting
completion certificates are subjected to tax on notional rental income. For
builders for whom constructed buildings are stock-in-trade, I propose to

30
apply this rule only after one year of the end of the year in which
completion certificate is received so that they get some breathing time for
liquidating their inventory.
148. We also propose to make a number of changes in the capital gain
taxation provisions in respect of land and building. The holding period for
considering gain from immovable property to be long term is 3 years now.
This is proposed to be reduced to 2 years. Also, the base year for
indexation is proposed to be shifted from 1.4.1981 to 1.4.2001 for all
classes of assets including immovable property. This move will significantly
reduce the capital gain tax liability while encouraging the mobility of assets.
We also plan to extend the basket of financial instruments in which the
capital gains can be invested without payment of tax.
149. For Joint Development Agreement signed for development of
property, the liability to pay capital gain tax will arise in the year the project
is completed.
150. The new capital for State of Andhra Pradesh is being constructed by
innovative land-pooling mechanism without use of the Land Acquisition Act.
I propose to exempt from capital gain tax, persons holding land on 2.6.2014,
the date on which the State of Andhra Pradesh was reorganised, and whose
land is being pooled for creation of capital city under the Government
scheme.
Measures for Stimulating Growth
151. A concessional with-holding rate of 5% is being charged on interest
earned by foreign entities in external commercial borrowings or in bonds
and Government securities. This concession is available till 30.6.2017. I
propose to extend it to 30.6.2020. This benefit is also extended to Rupee
Denominated (Masala) Bonds.
152. The Government gave income tax exemptions to start-ups with
certain conditions last year. For the purpose of carry forward of losses in
respect of such start-ups, the condition of continuous holding of 51% of
voting rights has been relaxed subject to the condition that the holding of
the original promoter/promoters continues. Also the profit linked
deduction available to the start-ups for 3 years out of 5 years is being
changed to 3 years out of 7 years.
153. Minimum Alternate Tax is at present levied as an advance tax. There
is a strong demand for abolition of MAT. Although the plan for phasing out
of exemptions will kick in from 1.4.2017, the full benefit of revenue out of
phase-out will be available to Government only after 7 to 10 years when all

31
those who are already availing exemptions at present complete their period
of availment. Therefore, it is not practical to remove or reduce MAT at
present. However, in order to allow companies to use MAT credit in future
years, I propose to allow carry forward of MAT upto a period of 15 years
instead of 10 years at present.
154. In my Budget proposals in 2015, I had announced that I would be
bringing the corporate income tax rate down to 25% gradually. In 2016
Budget, I had announced a reduction by 1% in case of those companies
whose turnover is less than ` 5 crore. In the same Budget, I had also
announced that new manufacturing companies who do not avail of any
exemption would be charged only 25% income tax.
155. Medium and Small Enterprises occupy bulk of economic activities
and are also instrumental in providing maximum employment to people.
However, since they do not get many exemptions, they end up paying
more taxes as compared to large companies. As per data of financial year
2015-16, 2.85 lakh companies making profit of less than ` 1 crore pay
effective tax rate of 30.26% while 298 companies making profit above ` 500
crores pay effective tax rate of 25.90%.
156. In order to make MSME companies more viable and also to
encourage firms to migrate to company format, I propose to reduce the
income tax for smaller companies with annual turnover upto ` 50 crore to
25%. As per data of Assessment Year 2015-16, there are 6.94 lakh
companies filing returns of which 6.67 lakh companies fall in this category
and, therefore, percentage-wise 96% of companies will get this benefit of
lower taxation. This will make our MSME sector more competitive as
compared to large companies. The revenue forgone estimate for this
measure is expected to be ` 7,200 crore per annum.
157. In order to give a boost to banking sector, I propose to increase
allowable provision for Non-Performing Asset from 7.5% to 8.5%. This will
reduce the tax liability of banks. I also propose to tax interest receivable on
actual receipt instead of accrual basis in respect of NPA accounts of all nonscheduled cooperative banks also at par with scheduled banks. This will
remove hardship of having to pay tax even when interest income is not
realised.
158. Considering the wide range of use of LNG as fuel as well as feed
stock for petro-chemicals sector, I propose to reduce the basic customs
duty on LNG from 5% to 2.5%.

32
159. In order to incentivise domestic value addition and to promote Make
in India, I propose to make changes in Customs & Central Excise duties in
respect of certain items which are given in the Annex III of this speech.
Some of these proposals are also for addressing duty inversion.
Promoting Digital Economy
160. There is a scheme of presumptive income tax for small and medium
tax payers whose turnover is upto ` 2 crores. At present, 8% of their
turnover is counted as presumptive income. I propose to make this 6% in
respect of turnover which is received by non-cash means. This benefit will
be applicable for transactions undertaken in the current year also.
161. I propose to limit the cash expenditure allowable as deduction, both
for revenue as well as capital expenditure, to ` 10,000. Similarly, the limit
of cash donation which can be received by a charitable trust is being
reduced from ` 10,000/- to ` 2000/-.
162. The Special Investigation Team (SIT) set up by the Government for
black money has suggested that no transaction above ` 3 lakh should be
permitted in cash. The Government has decided to accept this proposal.
Suitable amendment to the Income-tax Act is proposed in the Finance Bill
for enforcing this decision.
163. To promote cashless transactions, I propose to exempt BCD,
Excise/CV duty and SAD on miniaturised POS card reader for m-POS, micro
ATM standards version 1.5.1, Finger Print Readers/Scanners and Iris
Scanners. Simultaneously, I also propose to exempt parts and components
for manufacture of such devices, so as to encourage domestic
manufacturing of these devices.
Transparency in Electoral Funding
164. India is the world’s largest democracy. Political parties are an
essential ingredient of a multi-party Parliamentary democracy. Even 70
years after Independence, the country has not been able to evolve a
transparent method of funding political parties which is vital to the system
of free and fair elections. An attempt was made in the past by amending
the provisions of the Representation of Peoples Act, the Companies Act and
the Income Tax Act to incentivise donations by individuals, partnership
firms, HUFs and companies to political parties. Both the donor and the
donee were granted exemption from payment of tax if the accounts were
transparently maintained and returns were filed with the competent
authorities. Additionally, a list of donors who contributed more than
`20,000/- to any party in cash or cheque is required to be maintained. The

33
situation has only marginally improved since these provisions were brought
into force. Political parties continue to receive most of their funds through
anonymous donations which are shown in cash.
165. An effort, therefore, requires to be made to cleanse the system of
political funding in India. Donors have also expressed reluctance in
donating by cheque or other transparent methods as it would disclose their
identity and entail adverse consequences. I, therefore, propose the
following scheme as an effort to cleanse the system of funding of political
parties:
a)

In accordance with the suggestion made by the Election Commission,
the maximum amount of cash donation that a political party can
receive will be `2000/- from one person.

b)

Political parties will be entitled to receive donations by cheque or
digital mode from their donors.

c)

As an additional step, an amendment is being proposed to the
Reserve Bank of India Act to enable the issuance of electoral bonds in
accordance with a scheme that the Government of India would frame
in this regard. Under this scheme, a donor could purchase bonds
from authorised banks against cheque and digital payments only.
They shall be redeemable only in the designated account of a
registered political party. These bonds will be redeemable within the
prescribed time limit from issuance of bond.

d)

Every political party would have to file its return within the time
prescribed in accordance with the provision of the Income-tax Act.

Needless to say that the existing exemption to the political parties from
payment of income-tax would be available only subject to the fulfilment of
these conditions. This reform will bring about greater transparency and
accountability in political funding, while preventing future generation of
black money.
Ease of Doing Business
166. As an anti-avoidance measure, the provision of domestic transfer
pricing in respect of related entities was brought in the Finance Act of 2012.
Since then the number of entities being covered under domestic pricing has
gone up substantially necessitating a longer scrutiny, which causes hardship
to domestic companies. In order to reduce the compliance burden due to
domestic transfer pricing provisions, I propose to restrict the scope of
domestic transfer pricing only if one of the entities involved in related party
transaction enjoys specified profit-linked deduction.

34
167. I propose to increase the threshold limit for audit of business
entities who opt for presumptive income scheme from `1 crore to `2
crores. Similarly, the threshold for maintenance of books for individuals
and HUF is being increased from turnover of `10 lakhs to `25 lakhs or
income from `1.2 lakhs to `2.5 lakhs.
168. In 2012, Income-tax Act was amended to provide for taxation of
those transactions of transfer of shares or interest in a foreign entity
deriving its value substantially from Indian assets. Apprehensions have
been raised about some difficulties which arise because of this provision in
case of transfer of stake of investors of India-based funds located abroad
but investing in India-based companies.
169. In order to remove this difficulty, I propose to exempt Foreign
Portfolio Investor (FPI) Category I & II from indirect transfer provision. I also
propose to issue a clarification that indirect transfer provision shall not
apply in case of redemption of shares or interests outside India as a result
of or arising out of redemption or sale of investment in India which is
chargeable to tax in India.
170. As on today, a TDS of 5% is being deducted from commission
payable to individual insurance agents even if the income of some of them
may be below taxable limit. I propose to exempt them from the
requirement of TDS subject to their filing a self-declaration that their
income is below taxable limit.
171. Last year, I had announced a new scheme for presumptive taxation
for professionals with receipt upto `50 lakhs p.a. In respect of such
assesses, they are being given further benefit in terms of paying advance
tax in one instalment instead of four.
172. In order to allow the people to claim the refund expeditiously, the
time period for revising a tax return is being reduced to 12 months from
completion of financial year, at par with the time period for filing of return.
Also the time for completion of scrutiny assessments is being compressed
further from 21 months to 18 months for Assessment Year 2018-19 and
further to 12 months for Assessment Year 2019-20 and thereafter.
Personal Income-Tax
173. While the Government is trying to bring within tax-net more people
who are evading taxes, the present burden of taxation is mainly on honest
tax payers and salaried employees who are showing their income correctly.
Therefore, post-demonetisation, there is a legitimate expectation of this
class of people to reduce their burden of taxation. Also an argument is

35
made that if a nominal rate of taxation is kept for lower slab, many more
people will prefer to come within the tax net.
174. I, therefore, propose to reduce the existing rate of taxation for
individual assesses between income of `2.5 lakhs to `5 lakhs to 5% from the
present rate of 10%. This would reduce the tax liability of all persons below
`5 lakh income either to zero (with rebate) or 50% of their existing liability.
In order not to have duplication of benefit, the existing benefit of rebate
available to the same group of beneficiaries is being reduced to `2500
available only to assessees upto income of `3.5 lakhs. The combined effect
of both these measures will mean that there would be zero tax liability for
people getting income upto `3 lakhs p.a. and the tax liability will only be
`2,500 for people with income between `3 and `3.5 lakhs. If the limit of
`1.5 lakh under Section 80C for investment is used fully the tax would be
zero for people with income of `4.5 lakhs. While the taxation liability of
people with income upto `5 lakhs is being reduced to half, all the other
categories of tax payers in the subsequent slabs will also get a uniform
benefit of `12,500/- per person. The total amount of tax foregone on
account of this measure is `15,500 crores.
175. In order to make good some of this revenue loss on account of this
relief, I propose to levy a surcharge of 10% of tax payable on categories of
individuals whose annual taxable income is between `50 lakhs and `1 crore.
The existing surcharge of 15% of Tax on people earning more than `1 crore
will continue. This is likely to give additional revenue of `2,700 crores.
176. In order to expand tax net, I also plan to have a simple one-page
form to be filed as Income Tax Return for the category of individuals having
taxable income upto `5 lakhs other than business income. Also a person of
this category who files income tax return for the first time would not be
subjected to any scrutiny in the first year unless there is specific information
available with the Department regarding his high value transaction. I
appeal to all citizens of India to contribute to Nation Building by making a
small payment of 5% tax if their income is falling in the lowest slab of `2.5
lakhs to `5 lakhs.
177. Some other important proposals for amendment in Tax Laws which
are not covered by me in my speech are given in Annex III of this speech.
Goods and Services Tax
178. There has been substantial progress towards ushering in GST, by far,
the biggest tax reform since independence. Since the enactment of the
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, the
preparatory work for this path-breaking reform has been a top priority for

36
the Government. In this context, several teams of officers both from the
States and Central Board of Excise and Customs have been working
tirelessly to give finishing touch to the Model GST law and rules and other
details. Government on its part has promptly given effect to various
provisions of the Constitutional Amendment Act, including constitution of
the GST Council. Since then, the GST Council held 9 meetings to discuss
various issues relating to GST, including broad contours of the GST rate
structure, threshold exemption and parameters for composition scheme,
details for compensation to States due to implementation of GST,
examination of draft model GST law, draft IGST law and the Compensation
Law and administrative mechanism for GST. It is my privilege to inform this
august house that the GST Council has finalised its recommendations on
almost all the issues based on consensus and after spirited debate and
discussions. The preparation of IT system for GST is also on schedule. The
extensive reach-out efforts to trade and industry for GST will start from 1 st
April, 2017 to make them aware of the new taxation system.
179. Centre, through the Central Board of Excise & Customs, shall
continue to strive to achieve the goal of implementation of GST as per
schedule without compromising the spirit of co-operative federalism.
Implementation of GST is likely to bring more taxes both to Central and
State Governments because of widening of tax net. I have preferred not to
make many changes in current regime of Excise & Service Tax because the
same are to be replaced by GST soon.
RAPID
180. In the Annual Conclave of Tax officers called ‘Rajaswa Gyan Sangam’
held in June 2016, the Prime Minister had expressed his desire to bring
reforms in tax administration in the form of an approach of RAPID which
stands for Revenue, Accountability, Probity, Information and Digitisation.
This approach precisely reflects the strategy of Tax Department which is
now formulated. While revenue considerations always remain the focus of
Revenue Department, we are trying to bring in maximum use of
Information Technology to remove human contact with assesses as well as
to plug tax avoidance. We will try to maximise our efforts for e-assessment
in the coming year. We are also using a lot of data mining capability, both
in-house and outsourced. We plan to enforce greater accountability of
officers of Tax Department for specific act of commission and omission. I
would like to assure everyone that honest, tax-compliant person would be
treated with dignity and courtesy.
181. Madam Speaker, my direct tax proposals for exemptions, etc. would
result in revenue loss of `22,700 crore but after counting for revenue gain

37
of `2,700 crore for additional resource mobilisation proposal, the net
revenue loss in direct tax would come to `20,000 crore. There is no
significant loss or gain in my indirect tax proposals.
CONCLUSION
182. Madam Speaker, I have outlined the Budget proposals under our
overarching agenda: “Transform, Energise and Clean India”. Our emphasis
will now be on implementing all these proposals for the benefit of the
farmers, the poor and the underprivileged sections of our society.
183. Madam Speaker, it is said: “When my aim is right, when my goal is
in sight, the winds favour me and I fly”. There is no other day, which is
more appropriate for this, than today.
184. With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Budget to the
House.

38
Annex I to Part A
Other measures in the Financial Sector
1.

The commodities and securities derivative markets will be further
integrated by integrating the participants, brokers, and operational
frameworks.

2.

The process of registration of financial market intermediaries like
mutual funds, brokers, portfolio managers, etc. will be made fully
online by SEBI. This will improve ease of doing business.

3.

A common application form for registration, opening of bank and
demat accounts, and issue of PAN will be introduced for Foreign
Portfolio Investors (FPIs). SEBI, RBI and CBDT will jointly put in place
the necessary systems and procedures. This will greatly enhance
operational flexibility and ease of access to Indian capital markets.

4.

Steps will be taken for linking of individual demat accounts with
Aadhar.

5.

Presently institutions such as banks and insurance companies are
categorised as Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs) by SEBI. They are
eligible for participation in IPOs with specifically earmarked
allocations. It is now proposed to allow systemically important
NBFCs regulated by RBI and above a certain net worth, to be
categorised as QIBs. This will strengthen the IPO market and
channelize more investments.

6.

Listing and trading of Security Receipts issued by a securitisation
company or a reconstruction company under the SARFAESI Act will
be permitted in SEBI registered stock exchanges. This will enhance
capital flows in to the securitisation industry and will particularly be
helpful to deal with bank NPAs.

39
Annex II-A to Part A
ALLOCATIONS OF IMPORTANT MINISTRIES, SECTORS and VULNERABLE SECTIONS
(In Crores of Rupees)
Sl.
BE
RE
BE
Name of the Ministry
No.
2016-2017
2016-2017 2017-2018
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers'
1
Welfare
44485
48072
51026
Ministry of Development of North
2
Eastern Region
2430
2524
2682
Ministry of Drinking Water and
3
Sanitation
14010
16512
20011
Ministry of Health and Family
4
Welfare
38206
39688
48853
Ministry of Housing and Urban
5
Poverty Alleviation
5411
5285
6406
Ministry of Human Resource
6
Development
72394
73599
79686
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
7
Enterprises
3465
5463
6482
8 Ministry of Minority Affairs
3827
3827
4195
Ministry of New and Renewable
9
Energy
5036
4360
5473
10 Ministry of Railways
45000
46155
55000
Ministry of Road Transport and
11
Highways
57976
52447
64900
12 Ministry of Rural Development
87765
97760
107758
Ministry of Skill Development and
13
Entrepreneurship
1804
2173
3016
Ministry of Social Justice and
14
Empowerment
7350
7353
7763
15 Ministry of Tribal Affairs
4827
4827
5329
16 Ministry of Urban Development
24523
32550
34212
Ministry of Water Resources, River
17 Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation
6201
4756
6887
Ministry of Women and Child
18
Development
17408
17640
22095
ALLOCATION FOR WELFARE OF SC, ST, OTHER VULNERABLE GROUPS, WOMEN,
CHILDREN AND NORTH EASTERN REGION
BE
RE
BE
Description of the Allocation
2016-2017
2016-2017 2017-2018
Allocation for the welfare of
24005
25602
31920
I
Scheduled Tribes across all ministries
Allocation for the welfare of
38833
40920
52393
II
Scheduled Castes across all ministries

40
III
IV
V

VI

Allocation for the Welfare of Other
Vulnerable Groups
Allocation for North Eastern Region
across all ministries
Allocation under various schemes for
the welfare of women across all
ministries
Allocation under various schemes for
the welfare of Children across all
ministries

1873

1892

1976

29125

32180

43245

90770

96332

113327

65758

66249

71305

Sector Totals
Sl
No.

BE
2016-2017

Sectors

(In Crores of Rupees)
RE
BE
2016-2017 2017-2018

1

Agriculture and Allied sectors

48572

52821

58663

2

Rural Development

102543

114947

128560

3

Infrastructure

348952

358634

396135

3a

of which Transport

216268

216903

241387

4

Social sectors

168100

176225

195473

4a

Education and Health

112138

114806

130215

4b

Social
sectors
orientation

55962

61419

65258

5

Employment Generation, Skill and
Livelihood

12141

14870

17273

34359

37435

with

welfare

6 Scientific Ministries
33467
Source : Expenditure Profile and Expenditure Budget 2017-18

41
Annex II-B to Part A
ALLOCATION FOR IMPORTANT SCHEMES
(In Crores of Rupees)
BE
RE
BE
2016-2017
2016-2017 2017-2018

Sl
No.

Name of scheme

1

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme

38500

47499

48000

2
3

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna
National Rural Drinking Water
Mission
National Social Assistance Progamme
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna
National Education Mission including
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan

20075
5000

20936
6000

29043
6050

9500
19000
28330

9500
19000
28251

9500
19000
29556

National Programme of Mid-Day
Meal in Schools
Integrated Child Development
Services
National Health Mission
Swachh Bharat Mission
National Livelihood Mission Ajeevika
Urban Rejuvenation Mission : AMRUT
& Smart Cities Mission
Green Revolution
White Revolution
Blue Revolution
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana
(PMKSY) aggregated across three
ministries
Mission for Empowerment and
Protection for Women

9700

9700

10000

16260

16580

20755

20762
11300
3325

22598
12800
3334

27131
16248
4849

7296

9559

9000

12560
1138
247
5767

10360
1312
392
5189

13741
1634
401
7377

907

821

1089

850
8133

819
10682

962
11640

5500

13240

9000

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

17
18
19

20

Environment, Forestry and Wildlife
Employment Generation
Programmes other than MGNREGS,
including PM Kaushal Vikas Yojana,
ATUFS, PM Mudra Yojana, PMEGP
and ASPIRE
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana

42
Annex II-B to Part A
ALLOCATION FOR IMPORTANT SCHEMES
(In Crores of Rupees)
BE
RE
BE
2016-2017
2016-2017 2017-2018

Sl
No.

Name of scheme

21

Optical Fibre Cable based network for
Defence Services

2710

3210

3000

22

Price Stabilisation Fund for pulses

900

3400

3500

23
24

Bharatnet
Metro Projects

0
10000

6000
15700

10000
18000

25

25000

25000

10000

8500

7874

10635

27

Recapitalization of Public Sector
Banks according to the Indradhanush
scheme
Integrated Power Development
Scheme and Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Gram Jyoti Yojna
Namami Gange- National Ganga Plan

2150

1441

2250

28
29

Sagarmala
LPG connection to poor households

450
2000

406
2500

600
2500

26

43
Annex II-C to Part A
Resources Transferred to State and UTs with Legislature
(In Crores of Rupees)
Sl.
No.

Actuals
2015-16
506193

BE
2016-17
570337

RE
2016-17
608000

BE
2017-18
674565

99115 103101
277649 303412
984764 1081078

1

Devolution of states' share in taxes

2
3
4

Finance Commission Transfers
Other Central Transfers to States
Total Central Transfers to States
(Gross) (1+2+3)

84579
238572
829344

100646
254371
925354

5

Total Central Transfers to UTs with
Legislature (Gross)

5139

5320

6

Total Transfers (Gross) (4+5)

834483

930674

7

Recovery of Loans and Advances
(a+b)

11513

9473

9163

9516

a
b

States
UTs

11454
59

9028
445

8730
433

9083
433

8

Total Central Transfers to States
(Net) (4-7a)

817890

916326

9

Total Central Transfers to UTs with
Legislature (Net) (5-7b)

5080

4875

10

Total Transfers from Centre (Net)
(8+9)

822970

921201

981148 1075558

58750

26375

13000

11

In addition
Special State Government
Securities issued from National
Small Savings Fund (NSSF)*

5547

3996

990311 1085074

976034 1071995
5114

3563

15000

* Only Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Arunachal Pradesh and Delhi have chosen to receive
loans from NSSF starting from 2016-17.
Source: Budget at a Glance 2017-18.

44
Annex III to Part B of Budget Speech

Direct Taxes:
1.
1.1

Additional Revenue Mobilisation (ARM) and Anti-abuse Measures
It is proposed to extend the provisions of section 115BBDA of the Incometax Act which provides for levy of tax at the rate of ten per cent. on
dividend income exceeding ` 10 lakh, to all resident persons except
domestic companies or trust or institution or fund registered under section
12AA or referred to in section 10(23C). Presently, these provisions are
applicable only to the individuals, Hindu undivided family (HUF) and firms.

1.2

It is proposed to widen the scope of section 56 of the Income-tax Act to
provide that any money, immovable property or specified movable
property received without consideration or with inadequate consideration,
by any person, subject to certain exemption and exceptions, shall be
taxable if its value exceeds rupees fifty thousand.

1.3

It is proposed to provide that in case of transfer of unquoted equity shares,
where the fair market value, determined in the prescribed manner is less
than the consideration received, such fair market value shall be the
deemed value of consideration for the purpose of computation of capital
gains.

1.4

It is proposed to restrict the exemption from long term capital gains in
case of transfer of listed shares by providing that the exemption, subject to
notification of certain exceptions, shall be available if security transaction
tax has been paid at the time of acquisition of such shares where they
have been acquired after 1st October, 2004.

1.5

It is proposed to introduce a new provision in the Income-tax Act to
provide for tax deduction at source at the rate of five per cent. by an
individual or HUF, other than those whose books of account are required
to be audited, while making payment of rent of an amount exceeding `
50,000 per month. It is also proposed to provide that such tax shall be
deducted and deposited only once in a financial year through a challancum-statement. Further, the deductor shall not be required to obtain TAN
or file any separate TDS return for this purpose.

1.6

In order to align the transfer pricing provisions with the OECD transfer
pricing guidelines and international best practices, it is proposed to insert a
new section to provide that the assesse shall make secondary adjustment
where the primary adjustment to the transfer price has been made in
certain cases. The provision shall apply if the primary adjustment exceeds
one crore rupees and the excess money attributable to the adjustment is
not brought to India within the prescribed time.

45
1.7

In order to address the issue of thin capitalisation, it is proposed to provide
that the interest paid by an Indian company or permanent establishment
of a foreign company, in excess of thirty percent of earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA), or interest paid to
its associated enterprise, whichever is less, shall not be allowed as
deduction in computing its taxable profit. It is also proposed to allow carry
forward and set off of the interest so disallowed for eight assessment
years.

1.8

In order to address the existing anomaly of interest deduction in respect of
let out property vis-à-vis self-occupied property, it is proposed to restrict
set off of loss from house property against income under any other head
during the current year up to Rs two lakhs. The loss not so set off would be
allowed to be carried forward for set off against house property income
for eight assessment years.

1.9

It is proposed that donation by an entity registered under section 12A or
approved under section 10(23C), to other entity, registered under section
12A, with the direction that such donation shall form part of the corpus,
shall not be treated as application of income for charitable purposes.

2. Rationalisation Measures
2.1

It is proposed to provide that in case of foreign company, sale of leftover
stock of crude oil in case of strategic petroleum reserve after the expiry of
agreement or the arrangement, subject to fulfilment of certain conditions,
shall not be liable to tax in India.

2.2

It is proposed to provide a concessional tax rate of ten per cent. in case of
income arising from sale of carbon credit.

2.3

It is proposed to exempt government, foreign missions and state PSUs
engaged in business of transportation of passengers from Tax Collection at
Source (TCS) provisions relating to purchase of vehicles.

2.4

It is proposed to provide that the fair market value of the asset which has
been taken into account for the purpose of computation of accreted
income on which tax has been paid in accordance with provisions of
Chapter XII-EB of the Income-tax Act, shall be taken as the cost of
acquisition of that asset.

2.5

It is proposed to modify the conditions of special taxation regime for off
shore funds under section 9A of the Income-tax Act so as to provide that
the maintenance of minimum fund size would not be necessary in the year
in which the fund is being wound up.

2.6

In line with exemption available to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund and
certain other funds, it is proposed to provide that the income of the Chief
Minister’s Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund shall be
exempt from tax.

46
2.7

It is proposed to do away with the provisions enabling the Assessing
Officer not to process the return and thus withhold the refund in cases
where the return is selected for scrutiny till the completion of assessment.
It is however proposed that in cases where grant of refund is likely to
adversely affect the interest of revenue, it can be withheld with the
approval of the higher authority after recording the reasons in writing.

2.8

It is proposed to provide that certain entities, like, Investor Protection
Funds, Core Settlement Guarantee Fund, Tea/Coffee/Rubber Boards,
MPEDA, or APDEA; enjoying exemption from levy of income-tax under
section 10 of the Income-tax Act shall be required to furnish return of their
income.
In order to ensure timely filing of returns of income, it is proposed to levy a
fee in case of delay in filing the return.
It is proposed to provide that if an accountant or a merchant banker or a
registered valuer, furnishes incorrect information in a report or certificate,
he shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees for each such default.
It is proposed to provide that where the amount of foreign tax credit (FTC)
allowed against the tax paid under sections 115JB or 115JC of the Incometax Act exceeds the amount of FTC admissible against the tax payable by
the assesse on his income in accordance with the other provisions of the
Act, such excess credit shall be ignored while computing the amount
of credit under section 115JAA or section 115JD.
In a case where the foreign tax credit has not been granted to the assesse
on the ground that payment of such tax is in dispute, it is proposed to
provide, subject to certain conditions, additional time to the Assessing
Officer for allowing the said tax credit after such dispute is settled.
It is proposed to provide that no person shall receive payment or
aggregate of payments of an amount of three lakh rupees or more from a
person in a day, or in respect of a single transaction, or in respect of
transactions relating to one event or occasion, otherwise than by an
account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through a bank account. Such restriction shall not apply to
Government, banks or such other persons or class of persons or receipts
notified by the Central Government. It is also proposed to provide for a
penalty in case of contravention of this provision.
It is proposed to clarify that provisions relating to tax deduction at source
shall not apply to exempt compensation received under the Right to Fair
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013.
It is proposed to lower the rate of deduction of tax in case of payments
made to a person engaged only in the business of operation of call centre.
It is proposed to provide tax neutrality in case of conversion of preference
shares of a company into equity shares of that company.
It is proposed to provide that the cost of acquisition of share of an Indian
company in the hands of demerged foreign company in a tax neutral

2.9
2.10

2.11

2.12

2.13

2.14

2.15
2.16
2.17

47

2.18
2.19

2.20

demerger, shall be taken as the cost of acquisition in the hands of resulting
foreign company.
It is proposed to provide for grant of interest in case of refund of excess
payment of TDS.
It is proposed to merge the Authority for Advance Ruling (AAR) for IncomeTax with AAR for Customs, Central Excise and Service Tax; and create
common AAR. It is also proposed to amend the qualifications for
appointment of Chairman and Members.
It is proposed to make the orders passed by the authority under section
10(23C) of the Income-tax Act, appealable before the Tribunal.

2.21

It is proposed to authorise the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), to
issue directions or instructions in order to remove hardships faced by the
taxpayers in connection with imposition of penalty relating to tax
deduction or collection at source.

2.22

It is proposed to amend the provisions relating to computation of book
profit for the purpose of levy of minimum alternate tax (MAT) so as to align
it with the Indian Accounting Standards (Ind-AS).

2.23

It is proposed to clarify that the amendment made by the Finance Act,
2016 in Section 112 of the Income-tax Act providing for concessional rate
of tax in respect of transfer of share of a private limited company shall be
applicable retrospectively from assessment year 2013-14.

2.24

It is proposed to amend section 10AA of the Income-tax Act so as to
provide that the amount of deduction referred therein shall be allowed
from the total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the
Act before giving effect to the provisions of the said section and that the
said deduction shall not exceed the total income.

2.25

It is proposed to clarify that in the case of furnishing of information
relating to payment to a non-resident of any sum whether or not
chargeable to tax, the “person responsible for paying” shall be the payer
himself, or, if the payer is a company, the company itself including the
principal officer thereof.

2.26

It is proposed to provide that where any ‘term’ used in an agreement
entered into under sub-section (1) of Section 90 and 90A of the Income-tax
Act, is defined under the said agreement, the said term shall be assigned
the meaning as provided in the said agreement and where the term is not
defined in the agreement, but is defined in the Act, it shall be assigned the
meaning as defined in the Act or any technical explanation issued by the
Central Government.

2.27

It is proposed to provide that where the capital asset referred to in section
35AD of the Income-tax Act is used for an ineligible business and the
benefit of said section is withdrawn, the actual cost to the assessee in
respect of such asset shall be the actual cost to the assessee, as reduced by
an amount equal to the amount of depreciation calculated at the rate in

48
force that would have been allowable had the asset been used for the
purposes of business since the date of its acquisition.
2.28

It is proposed to provide that a trust or an institution, which has been
granted registration, and, has adopted or undertaken modification of the
objects subsequently which do not conform to the conditions of
registration, shall be required to obtain fresh registration.

2.29

In order to strengthen the TCS regime, it is proposed to provide that the
collectee shall furnish his PAN to the collector, failing which, tax shall be
collected at a higher rate.

2.30

In order to provide parity between an individual who is an employee and
an individual who is self-employed, it is proposed to provide that the selfemployed individual shall be eligible for deduction upto twenty per cent of
his gross total income in respect of contribution made to National Pension
System Trust.

2.31

It is proposed to provide that the authorised officer can, subject to
conditions as specified, provisionally attach a property for a period of six
months in order to protect the interest of revenue. It is also proposed to
provide that he can make a reference to the valuation officer for the
purpose of estimation of FMV of a property.

2.32

It is proposed to authorise the Joint Director, Deputy Director or the
Assistant Director of Income-tax to call for information for the purpose of
any enquiry without seeking approval of the higher authority.

2.33

It is proposed to expand the provision of section 133A of the Income-tax
Act so as to include any place at which activity for charitable purpose is
carried on.

2.34

It is proposed to authorise the CBDT to frame a scheme for centralised
issuance of notice calling for information and documents for the purpose
of verification of information in its possession, processing of such
documents and making the outcome thereof available to the Assessing
Officer.

2.35

In order to remove hardship, it is proposed to omit section 197(C) of the
Finance Act, 2016 which provided for assessment of undisclosed income
relating to any period prior to commencement of the Income Declaration
Scheme, 2016. However, in search cases, it is proposed to provide that in
case tangible evidence is found during the search, the Assessing Officer can
assess income upto ten years preceding the year in which search took
place.

2.36

In order to strengthen the TDS provisions, it is proposed to provide that a
disallowance shall be made in respect of an expenditure incurred against
income from other sources unless tax has been deducted thereon at
applicable rates.

2.37

In order to maintain the confidentiality of the source of the information
and the identity of the informer, it is proposed to clarify that the reasons
to believe as recorded by the income-tax authority authorising a search

49
operation or a requisition of books of account or asset, shall not be
disclosed to any person, authority or appellate tribunal.
2.38

It is proposed to provide that in case of unit in the consolidated plan of a
mutual fund scheme received in lieu of unit in the consolidating plan, the
actual cost and the period of holding shall be the cost and the period of
holding of the unit in the consolidating plan.

2.39

It is proposed to amend the provision of clause 4 of section 10 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 so as to make the correct reference to Foreign
Exchange Management Act (FEMA).

2.40

It is proposed to provide a sun set clause in respect of deduction allowed
to certain persons in respect of investment in listed equity shares and
listed units of an equity oriented fund.

2.41

It is proposed to exempt capital gains arising out of transfer of a rupee
denominated bond by a non-resident to a non-resident.

50

Indirect Taxes
I.

PROPOSALS INVOLVING CHANGE IN DUTY / TAX RATES:
CUSTOMS:
Commodity

I.

Rate of Duty
From
To

Incentivizing domestic value addition, ‘Make in India’

A. Reduction in Customs duty on inputs and raw materials to reduce costs
Mineral fuels and Mineral oils
1.

Liquefied Natural Gas

BCD – 5%

BCD – 2.5%

BCD – 7.5%

BCD – 5%

BCD – 2.5%

BCD – Nil

BCD – 7.5%

BCD – 2.5%

Chemicals & Petrochemicals
2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Medium Quality Terephthalic Acid (MTA) &
Qualified Terephthalic Acid (QTA)
Metals
Nickel
Finished Leather
Vegetable tanning extracts, namely, Wattle
extract and Myrobalan fruit extract
Capital Goods
Ball screws, linear motion guides and CNC
systems for use in the manufacture of CNC
machine tools, subject to actual user
condition

Ball screws and
liner motion
guides
BCD – 7.5%
CNC systems
BCD – 10%

Renewable Energy
All items of machinery required for fuel cell BCD – 10% /7.5%
based power generating systems to be set
up in the country or for demonstration CVD – 12.5%
purposes, subject to certain specified
conditions
All items of machinery required for balance BCD – 10% /7.5%
of systems operating on biogas/ biomethane/ by-product hydrogen, subject to
CVD – 12.5%
certain specified conditions
Miscellaneous
All parts for use in the manufacture of LED
Applicable
lights or fixtures, including LED lamps,
BCD, CVD
subject to actual user condition
All inputs for use in the manufacture of LED Applicable BCD
Driver and MCPCB for LED lights or fixtures,
including LED lamps, subject to actual user
condition

BCD – 2.5%

BCD – 5%
CVD – 6%

BCD – 5%
CVD – 6%

BCD – 5%
CVD – 6%
5%

51
Commodity

B.

Rate of Duty
From
To
Changes in Customs and Excise / CV duty to address the problem of duty
inversions in certain sectors
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

Chemicals & Petrochemicals
o-Xylene
2-Ethyl Anthraquinone [2914 69 90] for use
in manufacture of hydrogen peroxide,
subject to actual user condition
Vinyl Polyethylene Glycol (VPEG) for use in
manufacture of Poly Carboxylate Ether,
subject to actual user condition
Textiles
Nylon mono filament yarn for use in
monofilament long line system for Tuna
fishing, subject to certain specified
conditions
Metals
Co-polymer coated MS tapes / stainless
steel tapes for manufacture of specified
telecommunication grade optical fibres or
optical fibre cables, subject to actual user
condition
MgO coated cold rolled steel coils [7225 19
90] for use in the manufacture of CRGO
steel, subject to actual user condition
Hot Rolled Coils [7208] for use in the
manufacture of welded tubes and pipes
falling under heading 7305 or 7306, subject
to actual user condition
Automobiles
Clay 2 Powder (Alumax) for use in ceramic
substrate for catalytic convertors, subject
to actual user conditon
Renewable Energy
Solar tempered glass for use in the
manufacture of solar cells/panels/modules
Parts/raw materials for use in the
manufacture of solar tempered glass for
use in solar photovoltaic cells/modules,
solar power generating equipment or
systems, flat plate solar collector, solar
photovoltaic module and panel for water
pumping and other applications, subject to

BCD – 2.5%
BCD – 7.5%

BCD – Nil
BCD – 2.5%

BCD – 10%

BCD – 7.5%

BCD – 7.5%

BCD – 5%

BCD – Nil

BCD – 10%

BCD – 10%

BCD – 5%

BCD – 12.5%

BCD – 10%

BCD – 7.5%

BCD – 5%

BCD – 5%

BCD – Nil

CVD – 12.5%

CVD – 6%

52
Commodity

C.

D.

II.
III.

Rate of Duty
From
To

actual user condition
20. Resin and catalyst for use in the
BCD – 7.5%
BCD – 5%
manufacture of cast components for Wind
CVD – 12.5%
CVD – Nil
Operated Energy Generators [WOEG],
SAD – 4%
SAD – Nil
subject to actual user condition
Miscellaneous
21. Membrane Sheet and Tricot / Spacer for
CVD – 12.5%
CVD – 6%
use in the manufacture of RO membrane
element for household type filters, subject
to actual user condition
Changes in Customs duty to provide adequate protection to domestic industry
Food Processing
22. Cashew nut, roasted, salted or roasted and
BCD – 30%
BCD – 45%
salted
Electronics / Hardware
23. Populated Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) for
SAD – Nil
SAD – 2%
use in the manufacture of mobile phones,
subject to actual user condition
Miscellaneous
24. RO membrane element for household type
BCD – 7.5%
BCD – 10%
filters
Promotion of cashless transactions and promote domestic manufacturing of
devices used therefor
25. a) Miniaturized POS card reader for m-POS
Applicable
BCD – Nil
(not including mobile phones or tablet BCD, CVD SAD
CVD – Nil
computer),
SAD – Nil
b) Micro ATM as per standards version 1.5.1,
c) Finger Print Reader / Scanner, and
d) Iris Scanner
26. Parts and components for manufacture of:
Applicable
BCD – Nil
a) miniaturized POS card reader for m-POS BCD, CVD SAD
CVD – Nil
(not including mobile phones or tablet
SAD – Nil
computer),
b) micro ATM as per standards version 1.5.1,
c) Finger Print Reader / Scanner, and
d) Iris Scanner
Imposition of export duty to conserve domestic resources
27. Other aluminium ores, including laterite
Nil
15%
Improving ease of doing business and Export Promotion
28. De-minimis customs duties exemption limit Duty payable CIF value not
for goods imported through parcels, not exceeding exceeding
packets and letters
Rs.100 per
Rs.1000 per
consignment consignment
29. Limit of duty free import of eligible items
3% of FOB
5% of FOB

53
Commodity

IV.

Rate of Duty
From
To
for manufacture of leather footwear or
value of said value of said
synthetic footwear or other leather goods exported
goods
products for use in the manufacture of said
during the
exported
goods for export
preceding
during the
financial year
preceding
financial year
Anti-avoidance measure
30. Silver medallion, silver coins, having silver
CVD – Nil
CVD –
content not below 99.9%, semi12.5%
manufactured form of silver and articles of
silver
Note: (a) “Basic Customs Duty” means the customs duty levied under the
Customs Act, 1962.
(b) “CVD” means the Additional Duty of Customs levied under sub-section
(1) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.
(c) “SAD” means the Special Additional Duty of Customs levied under subsection (5) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.
(d) “Export duty” means duty of Customs leviable on goods specified in
the Second Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.
EXCISE
Commodity

Rate of Duty
From

To

12.5% or Rs.3755 per
thousand, whichever
is higher
12.5% or Rs.3755 per
thousand, whichever
is higher
Rs.3755 per thousand

12.5% or Rs.4006 per
thousand, whichever is
higher
12.5% or Rs.4006 per
thousand, whichever is
higher
Rs.4006 per thousand

12.5% or Rs.3755 per
thousand, whichever
is higher
12.5% or Rs.3755 per
thousand, whichever
is higher
Rs.21 per thousand

12.5% or Rs.4006 per
thousand, whichever is
higher
12.5% or Rs.4006 per
thousand, whichever is
higher
Rs.28 per thousand

Rs.21 per thousand

Rs.78 per thousand

I.

Public Health

A.

Tobacco and Tobacco Products
1.

Cigar and cheroots

2.

Cigarillos

3.

Cigarettes of tobacco
substitutes
Cigarillos of tobacco
substitutes

4.

5.

Others of
substitutes

6.

Paper rolled biris –
handmade
Paper rolled biris –

7.

tobacco

54
Commodity

Rate of Duty
From

II.

machine made
Incentivizing domestic value addition, ‘Make in India’

A.

Renewable Energy
8.

B.

All items of machinery
required for balance
of systems operating
on
biogas/
biomethane/ by-product
hydrogen

Miscellaneous
9.
Membrane Sheet and
Tricot/Spacer for use
in the manufacture of
RO
membrane
element
for
household type filters,
subject to actual user
condition
10. All parts for use in the
manufacture of LED
lights or fixtures,
including LED lamps,
subject to actual user
condition
11. a. Waste and scrap of
precious metals or
metals clad with
precious
metals
arising in course of
manufacture
of
goods failing in
Chapter 71
b. Strips,
wires,
sheets, plates and
foils of silver
c. Articles of silver
jewellery,
other
than those studded
with
diamond,
ruby, emerald or
sapphire
d. Silver coin of purity
99.9% and above,
bearing a brand

To

12.5%

6%

12.5%

6%

Applicable duty

6%

Nil

Nil, subject to the
condition that no credit
of duty paid on inputs or
input services or capital
goods has been availed
by manufacturer of such
goods

55
Commodity

Rate of Duty
From

III.

To

name
when
manufactured from
silver on which
appropriate duty of
customs or excise
has been paid
Promotion of cashless transactions and promote domestic manufacturing of
devices used therefor
12. a) Miniaturized POS
Applicable duty
Nil
card reader for
m-POS
(not
including mobile
phones or tablet
computers),
b) micro ATM as per
standards version
1.5.1,
c) Finger
Print
Reader / Scanner,
and
d) Iris Scanner
13. Parts and components
Applicable duty
Nil
for manufacture of:
a) Miniaturized POS
card reader for
m-POS
(not
including mobile
phones or tablet
computers),
b) Micro ATM as per
standards version
1.5.1,
c) Finger
Print
Reader / Scanner,
and
d) Iris Scanner

Note: “Basic Excise Duty” means the excise duty set forth in the First Schedule to
the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.

56
CHANGES IN RATE OF ADDITIONAL DUTY LEVIED UNDER SECTION 85 OF
THE FINANCE ACT, 2005
Commodity
A.

From

To

6%

9%

4.2%

8.3%

Pan Masala
1.

B.

Rate of duty

Pan Masala

Tobacco and Tobacco Products
2.

Unmanufactured tobacco

3.

Non-filter Cigarettes of length not
exceeding 65mm

Rs.215 per
thousand

Rs.311 per
thousand

4.

Non-filter Cigarettes of length
exceeding 65mm but not exceeding
70mm

Rs.370 per
thousand

Rs.541 per
thousand

5.

Filter Cigarettes
exceeding 65mm

not

Rs.215 per
thousand

Rs.311 per
thousand

6.

Filter Cigarettes of length exceeding
65mm but not exceeding 70mm

Rs.260 per
thousand

Rs.386 per
thousand

7.

Filter Cigarettes of length exceeding
70mm but not exceeding 75mm

Rs.370 per
thousand

Rs.541 per
thousand

8.

Other Cigarettes

Rs.560 per
thousand

Rs.811 per
thousand

9.

Chewing
khaini)

6%

12%

10.

Jarda scented tobacco

6%

12%

11.

Pan Masala
(Gutkha)

6%

12%

tobacco

of

length

(including

containing

filter

Tobacco

SERVICE TAX

A.

S.
Changes
No.
Relief to the armed forces of the Union from service tax
1.

Services provided or agreed to be provided by the
Army, Naval and Air Force Group Insurance Funds
by way of life insurance to members of the Army,
Navy and Air Force under the Group Insurance
Schemes of the Central Government is being
exempted from service tax from 10th September,
2004 (the date when the services of life insurance
became taxable).

Existing

Proposed

14%

Nil

57
B.

Dispute resolution, certainty of taxation and avoidance of litigation
1.

C.

D.

Notification No. 41/2016-ST dated 22.09.2016,
14%
Nil
which has exempted from service tax, one time
upfront amount (called as premium, salami, cost,
price, development charges or by whatever name)
payable for grant of long-term lease of industrial
plots (30 years or more) by State Government
industrial development corporations/undertakings
to industrial units, is proposed to be made effective
from 1.6.2007 (the date when the services of
renting of immovable property became taxable).
2. Rule 2A of the Service Tax (Determination of Value)
4.2%
4.2%
Rules, 2006 is proposed to be amended from
01.07.2010 so as to make it clear that value of
service portion in execution of works contract
involving transfer of goods and land or undivided
share of land, as the case may be, shall not include
value of property in such land or undivided share of
land.
Promotion of Regional Connectivity Scheme of Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Under the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS),
14%
Nil
exemption from service tax is being provided in
respect of the amount of viability gap funding (VGF)
payable to the airline operator for providing the
services of transport of passengers by air,
embarking from or terminating in a Regional
Connectivity Scheme (RCS) airport, for a period of
one year from the date of commencement of
operations of the Regional Connectivity Scheme
(RCS) airport as notified by Ministry of Civil
Aviation.
Rationalization Measures
1. The exemption in respect of services provided by
14%
Nil
Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs) by way of
two year full time residential Post Graduate
Programmes (PGP) in Management for the Post
Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM), to
which admissions are made on the basis of the
Common Admission Test (CAT), conducted by IIMs,
is being extended to include non-residential
programmes.
2. Explanation-I (e) to Rule 6 of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 is being amended
so as to exclude banks and financial institutions including non-banking
financial companies engaged in providing services by way of extending
deposits, loans or advances from its ambit.

58
3.

The Negative List entry in respect of “services by
way of carrying out any process amounting to
manufacture or production of goods excluding
alcoholic liquor for human consumption”, in the
Finance Act, 1994, is proposed to be omitted and
instead placed in the exemption notification.
Consequently, clause (40) of section 65B of the
Finance Act, which defines ‘process amounting to
manufacture’ is also proposed to be omitted and
instead placed in the exemption notification.

Nil

Nil

AMENDMENT IN THE FIRST SCHEDULE TO THE CUSTOMS TARIFF ACT, 1975
S.
No.
A.

Amendment

1.

The following amendments are being carried out to:

Amendments not affecting rates of duty

(i)

Delete tariff items 1302 32 10 and 1302 32 20 and entries relating
thereto and create new tariff items 1106 10 10 and 1106 10 90, in
relation to Guar meal and its products so as to harmonize the Customs
Tariff with HS Nomenclature.
(ii) Create new tariff item 1511 90 30 for Refined bleached deodorized
palm stearin, so as to harmonize Customs Tariff in accordance with
WCO classification decision.
(iii) Substitute tariff items 3823 11 11 to 3823 11 90 and entries relating
thereto with tariff item 3823 11 00.
(iv) Substitute tariff items 3904 10 10 to 3904 22 90 with tariff items 3904
10 10 to 3904 22 00 in relation to the PVC Resin.
2.

Chapter Note (4) of Chapter 98 is being amended so as to remove the nonapplicability of headings 9803 and 9804 to goods imported through courier
service. Also, heading 9804 is being amended so as to extend the classification
of personal imports by courier, sea, or land under this heading.

