Interim Budget
Speech
Jaswant

2004-2005
of
Singh

Minister of Finance
February 3, 2004

I. INTRODUCTION
Mr. Speaker,
1.
I rise to present an Interim Budget, for part of the fiscal year 2004-05. This
seeks a Vote-on-Account to enable the Government to discharge its responsibilities
and to meet all essential expenditure during the first four months of 2004-05. The
Demands for Grants and the Annual Financial Statement presented are, however,
for the full financial year, though, these could be revised, as is normal, at the time of
presentation of the regular Budget. I am also introducing a Finance Bill, seeking to
continue the existing tax structure for the present.
2.
Under the premiership of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, this is the seventh
successive budget of the Government of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). On
this occasion I share with the country and the House a sense of great satisfaction at
the robust showing of our national economy, and also express our sincere gratitude
for the cooperation, support and encouragement that the people of India have so
consistently and so ungrudgingly given to the NDA and to its Government. The
country’s macro-economic situation is better than it has ever been in the last fifty
years. Internationally, too, there is now much greater, and a much more widespread
recognition that India is progressing in all spheres of national endeavour, that it has
evolved into a stable economy, with assured growth, and enhanced national prosperity.
II. NDA: ECONOMIC POLICY – APPROACH AND ACHIEVEMENTS
3.
This Government has consistently placed the citizens’ well being at the
core of its responsibilities. Our adherence to ‘Panch priorities’ remains. The
objectives of the life-time concerns of our citizens: enhanced employment, and
eradication of poverty; a second green revolution in agriculture; infrastructure
development; fiscal consolidation; and greater manufacturing sector efficiency, are
our solemn commitments.
1

2

4.
We believe, Sir, that both are necessary: a vision for a resurgent India and,
simultaneously an awakening so that the disadvantaged of our land are lifted beyond
poverty. We hold that economic development is not about economics alone, it is
always, simultaneously, a political statement too, for ‘development’ devoid of
compassion is a misnomer. Of course, growth statistics are very important; they are
vital inputs, but they must also be the indices that assist us in designing distributive
justice. It is for this reason that ‘gross national contentment’ is so important, as the
catalyst that motivates redoubled national endeavour.
It is from seeking national
contentment that objectives are born: “Garib ke pet me dana, Grihini ki tukia mein
anna.” Sir, India must be amongst the leading economies of the word, that simply
put is our national destiny; to be in service of the country’s destiny is the Government’s
honour and its bounden duty.
From this directly flow our national economic
objectives.
5.
Economic growth indices, in the current year, Mr. Speaker, are very
encouraging. With inflation at 4 to 4.5 per cent, this year we expect the growth rate
of our GDP to be between 7.5 and 8 per cent. Though, there are higher growth
estimates that have been made, for the present, we prefer to remain with the cited
figures. This level of growth is a matter of great satisfaction. Sir, employment has
increased, but so have expectations. We must meet this challenge. Bold initiatives
in infrastructure have already generated several layers of immediate employment,
simultaneously laying the foundation for additional quality employment across a
broad spectrum of economic activity. The objective of enhancing job opportunities
will be pursued vigorously. Our foreign exchange reserves crossed US$100 billion
on December 19, 2003. They continue to grow, liberating us from the mentality of
want. For greater openness and to share necessary information with citizens, the first
ever Report of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), on Foreign Exchange Reserves is being
released today. It can be accessed on the Ministry’s, as well as the RBI’s website.
6.
Sir, a combination of moderate inflation, declining interest rates, and healthy
capital markets has set our economy on the path of accelerated growth. To further
encourage this is our responsibility. Preserving the strength of our macroeconomic
fundamentals has, therefore, to be much more focused. Management of the economy
is a continuing responsibility, governance can neither pause nor cease, and measures
to fully consolidate, and continuously enhance the growth momentum must always
be adopted in time. Only in that manner can we realise the vision of economic and
social progress that we have cherished since independence.
III. INITIATIVES AND THE ROAD AHEAD
Reform Measures
Antyodaya Anna Yojana
7.
Antyodaya Anna Yojana, launched by the Prime Minister in December 2000,
currently covers 1.5 crore families below the poverty line (BPL). This is a highly
successful programme, widely acclaimed. It directly addresses poverty alleviation
and nutritional adequacy. This programme is now being extended by increasing its
coverage to 2 crore BPL families. Whilst doing so, it will be ensured that tribal states,
districts, or belts receive added allocations. This will be effective from April 1, 2004.

3

Pradhan

Mantri

Swasthya

Suraksha

Yojana

8.
Poverty and disease are interlinked. Specialty hospitals in the private sector
remain beyond the reach of many of our citizens. The Prime Minister had, therefore,
last Independence Day, announced the establishing of six hospitals, in the
Government sector, on the pattern of All India Institute of Medical Sciences(AIIMS).
This ‘Pradhanmantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana’ envisages six new AIIMS like
hospitals, one each in the States of Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, and Uttaranchal. Hon’ble Members are doubtless aware that no additional
hospital on the pattern of AIIMS has been set up by any Government, since 1956. I
would also like to mention that under this Pradhanmantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana,
one medical college each in the six States of Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal will also be upgraded to
the level of AIIMS.
9.
I am happy to announce that a provision for both these schemes has been
made in this Budget itself.
Rural
10.
The Government is committed to ensuring the availability of timely credit
at affordable rates to our farmers, and to other citizens in rural India. For this
objective, the following additional measures will be taken:
♦

In July, 2003, a reduction in the rate of interest for crop loans by public
sector banks to 9 per cent was announced. The NABARD Act was also
appropriately amended. I have been urging the Indian Banks’ Association
to further lower the interest rates for agricultural purposes. Some public
sector banks have already done so. I am confident that other banks will
also respond by offering loans at rates lower than those prevailing currently.

♦

Traditionally, banks have sought relatively higher security on credit for
agriculture. To illustrate, banks insist on mortgaging the entire land
holding of a farmer borrower, as security for advances for agricultural
purposes. Banks are, therefore, now being advised to assess individual
credit-worthiness and to not routinely insist on additional collateral through
a mortgage of the entire land holding. As a principle, collateral security
should be proportionate to the value of the loan.

♦

Prescriptions relating to Non-Performing Assets (NPAs), in relation to crop
loan accounts, have posed problems in the provisioning of credit to farmers
where seasonality and uncertainty of farm incomes are not fully captured.
A Committee has been set up under Dr.V.S. Vyas, an eminent agriculture
economist, to address this issue.
Suitable remedial measures will be
recommended within 90 days.

♦

I expect all eligible farmers to be in receipt of their Kisan Credit Cards
(KCC) by March 31, 2004.
To extend the benefit of technological
developments in the banking industry to rural India, the existing Kisan
Credit Card will hereafter be modified, upon individual request, for use on
ATM machines, wherever such facility exists.

4

♦

A Farm Income Insurance Scheme has been introduced by the Ministry
of Agriculture in 20 districts, on a pilot basis. This will be extended to 100
districts, of the country from the forthcoming Kharif season. Details will be
announced by the Ministry of Agriculture.

♦

Self Help Groups (SHGs) have been a remarkable success story, but only
in some states of the country. NABARD has, therefore, been asked to take
up a special promotional campaign in the States where this programme is
yet to gather momentum. In the first phase, an intensive programme will,
therefore, be launched in the states of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh. Public Sector Banks will also supplement this effort in other
States.

♦

Tea is an important agro-processing industry, employing a large number
of our citizens in North Bengal, Assam, the North-East and some of the
Southern States. Currently, this industry is beset by many problems. I
had, therefore, tasked the Indian Banks Association to prepare a revival
package. This has now been finalized. Special Tea Term Loan, repayable
in five years, with a moratorium of one year, shall be provided. In case of
small tea growers banks have agreed to extend fresh working capital limits
up to Rs.2 lakh, at an interest rate of 9 per cent.

♦

In addition, steps will be undertaken to examine the feasibility of a debt
amelioration scheme in the tea sector, too.

♦

Sugar, another major agro-processing industry of the country, generating
substantial employment, currently faces a complex web of problems.
Government will, therefore, prepare a package for the revitalisation of this
industry, in consultation with all the stakeholders. In the meantime, as a
measure of temporary relief, restructuring of loans taken by sugar factories
will be examined by the lending agencies, including banks, in consultation
with RBI and NABARD.

11.
Cooperative banks have played a vital role in the delivery of rural credit.
They, too, have a variety of problems hampering their capacity to deliver credit at
reasonable rates of interest. A scheme to revitalize the cooperative credit structure,
envisaging an outlay of about Rs.15,000 crore, to be shared between the Central
and State Governments, in an appropriate ratio, has been prepared. It is proposed
to initiate this scheme as soon as the revised regulatory framework has been put
in place.
Cattle

Development

12.
Cattle are a vital integral of our rural economy. To give a boost to the entire
gamut of this economic activity, such as animal husbandry, dairying and sheep
rearing, the Government will consider the setting up of a National Cattle Development
Board with appropriate budgetary support.
Laghu Udyami Credit Cards
13.
To further encourage the development of small-scale and self-employed
ventures steps have been taken to liberalise Laghu Udyami Credit Card scheme,

5

providing small and medium enterprises easier access to bank credit. It has now
been decided, in consultation with IBA, that the public sector banks will increase
the credit limit of their cards, for borrowers who have a satisfactory track record,
from Rs.2 lakh to Rs.10 lakh. Banks are being advised to make the modified scheme
operational from March 1, 2004.
Stamp

Duty

Reform

14.
A comprehensive reform of the entire stamp duty regime is being addressed
in consultation with State Governments, as high stamp duty increases transaction
costs, restricting economic activity. The Government has, in the meantime, decided
to reduce stamp duty on all such instruments where the authority to fix rates is of the
Central Government. As a first step, and as the first reduction, the existing stamp
duty structure is being halved, that is, being reduced by 50 per cent on all Central
Government stamp papers. As for duty on Receipts, here too, the threshold for payment
of stamp duty is to be increased from Rs.500 to Rs.50,000. As, however, this last
reform requires an amendment to the Act, it can not be taken up at this stage.
Special Areas
Island territories
15.
The district of Nicobar, in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, is one of our
remotest districts. These islands, separated by vast distances across the sea are
relatively inaccessible. Therefore, in the Nicobar group of islands, a hard area
allowance at the rate of 25 per cent of basic pay will, with effect from April 1, 2004,
be paid to all Government employees posted there.
16.
Due to high cost of construction, consequently the high rentals prevailing
in this region, and as directed by the Prime Minister it has been decided that the
status of Port Blair be raised from a ‘C’ to a ‘B-1’ class city, for purposes of house
rent allowance (HRA). Simultaneously, rural areas of the Union Territory of Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and the entire Union Territory of Lakshadweep will also stand
upgraded from their existing status of ‘unclassified’ to ‘C’ class city, for the purpose
of payment of this allowance. Consequently, HRA will also be raised from 7.5 per
cent to 15 per cent of the basic pay in all other areas of the Union Territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as well as in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
The status of State of Goa is also being raised from ‘C’ to ‘B-1’, from April 1, 2004, for
the purposes of HRA.
Desert areas
17.
The desert areas of the country are under a variety of stresses. Most of
them are also either border districts or are contiguous to it. Last year, I had announced
the ‘Maru Gochar Yojana’, a special programme for rehabilitation and development
of traditional pasture lands in the desert districts of Rajasthan. I am glad to inform
Hon’ble Members that implementation of this programme has commenced. I now
propose to establish a Task Force for Integrated Development of Desert Areas, with
a mandate to address the problem of sustainable livelihood in our deserts. This Task
Force will review all relevant current programmes, identify gaps, define thrust areas,
and make appropriate recommendations. It will also examine the establishment of a
Rural Technology Centre, in one of the desert districts, and give its recommendations
in this regard.

6

18.
The Indira Gandhi canal project has languished for decades, slowly inching
its way, year after year, through the desert. Considering the inordinate delay in its
completion and the critical importance of water in our desert areas, this canal project
will, hereafter, be accelerated through a fresh Centre-State initiative, including
additional, innovative funding. Similarly, for an extension into Rajasthan of the
Narmada Canal too, the Ministry of Finance will work with the Government of
Rajasthan and assist it in financing an early completion.
Kutch and adjoining districts
19.
At present, new industrial units in the Kutch Districts of Gujarat, established
during the period from July 31, 2001 to July 31, 2004 and which start commercial
production on or before July 31, 2004 are exempt from excise duty. In order to give
some more time for completion of such projects, I am extending the last date, for
setting up of such new units, from July 31, 2004 to December 31, 2004. The period
of exemption from excise duty will continue to be five years from the date of start of
commercial production.
Water Scarcity in Metropolitan Cities
20.
Several initiatives have been taken by this Government to address the vital
question of providing an assured supply of potable water to rural India. Metropolitan
cities have until now had to address this shortage through either their own municipal
resources or on the strength of support received from their respective State
Governments. The need and demand for water has grown much faster than additional
supply measures. The Prime Minister has, therefore, decided to initiate an accelerated
drinking water supply scheme for mega cities, such as Bangalore, Chennai, Delhi
and Hyderabad.
The provision for existing Central scheme for infrastructure
development in mega-cities will be augmented by accessing the Infrastructure Fund,
the Life Insurance Corporation and other such funding sources. Details will be
finalised by the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the scheme is operational by
March 1, 2004.
Convention

Centres

21.
Government has now decided upon the venues for four global standard
international convention centres, to be established through private-public
partnership. I am glad that two of these will be located in the metropolitan cities of
Delhi and Mumbai, and one each in Goa and Rajasthan. Both Goa and Rajasthan
have great tourism potential, but need more infrastructural facilities. Goa will thus
also be enabled to provide suitable facilities for holding international film festivals.
So that the convention centre in Jaipur functions effectively, the airport in Jaipur
will be converted into an international airport. Details of all these will be announced
shortly.
Development

Finance

22.
There is no alternative to development finance. Steps to revive and restructure the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) are already in hand. In
accordance with the mandate of the Parliament, the Ministry of Finance is committed
to preserving and strengthening the IDBI’s role as a development financial institution.

7

23.
The current economic growth pattern requires continuous and added
investment. For this, finance has to be made available timely, at reasonable rates
and in a coordinated manner. Since the restructured IDBI has the requisite expertise,
also experience in project appraisal, funding and coordination, it has been decided
to designate IDBI as the lead developmental finance institution. Government will
provide necessary support to IDBI for this task. IDBI’s effort will be complemented
by other premier institutions and banks such as the Infrastructure Development
Finance Corporation and the State Bank of India.
24.
Similarly, the Industrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI) will be
restructured through transfer of its impaired assets to an Asset Reconstruction
Company and merger with a large public sector bank. Both these institutions, the
IDBI and IFCI, should be functional in the new financial year after their
transformation.
Other

Schemes

25.
The Agricultural Infrastructure and Credit Fund, the Small and Medium
Enterprise Fund, and the Industrial Infrastructure Fund will be operational shortly.
All the three funds will, without compromising the norms of financial prudence,
provide credit at highly competitive rates, which is expected to be 2 percentage points
below the Prime Lending Rate (PLR).
26.
I wish to reiterate that the Agricultural Infrastructure and Credit Fund will
provide credit support to infrastructure facilities such as wasteland development,
completion of existing but incomplete minor irrigation projects plus new minor
irrigation works, grading, certification, and storage of agro-products, and construction
of modern abattoirs. This Fund will be called ‘Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan
Fund’. Similarly, the SME Fund will address the problem of inadequacy of financial
resources, at highly competitive rates for the small-scale sector, and a lack of SIDBI
coverage for some of the medium-sized enterprises. The Industrial Infrastructure
Fund will provide credit at highly competitive rates for power generation, seaports,
airports, roads, tourism, telecommunication, and urban infrastructure like municipal
services, water supply, sewage disposal and environmental projects.
Defence

Modernisation

Fund

27.
The process of defence procurement often extends to over three years.
Adequate and a committed availability of funds, over such a period, for defence
modernisation and weapons systems acquisition needs a satisfactory resolution. It
has accordingly been decided to establish a non-lapsable, Defence Modernisation
Fund of Rs.25,000 crore. This will commit availability of adequate funds for the
purpose. The Fund will be made available to the Ministry of Defence from the new
financial year.
Employee

Welfare

28.
The Fifth Central Pay Commission had recommended that Dearness
Allowance (DA) should be merged with basic pay whenever the DA exceeds 50 per cent
of pay. At present, DA is at 59 per cent of pay. The Government having re-examined
this recommendation in depth has therefore, decided that DA, to the extent of 50 per
cent of pay, will be merged with basic pay. This will take effect from April 1, 2004.

8

Direct

taxes

29.
Some necessary changes in Income Tax procedures require the amendment
of the Income Tax Act. While changes in the Act are currently not being proposed, it
is the conviction of the Government, also our commitment that
♦
Fiscal benefits available to new projects in the power sector should be
extended up to 2012, instead of 2006, and also be available to cases of
take-over from State Electricity Boards.
♦

The regime of listed equities acquired on or after March 1, 2003 being
exempt from long-term capital gains tax should be extended for a further
period of three years, so as to provide stability.

♦

More than 90 per cent of world shipping tonnage is subject to very low
levels of taxation. To provide a level playing field so that Indian shipping
becomes internationally competitive, a tonnage tax scheme, with notional
income at a fixed rate, on the basis of net registered tonnage should be
considered.

♦

Farmers face hardship on account of levy of tax on capital gains, and accrued
interest on enhanced compensation, when their agricultural land is acquired
by the Government. The Government believes that capital gains on such
acquisition should be exempt from tax. There should also be no deduction
of tax at source on the interest earned on enhanced compensation for
acquisition of such land.

30.
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) has scope for employment generation.
It has been clarified that if outsourced services are ancillary and auxiliary in nature
and adequate remuneration is paid to the Indian call centre, then there shall be no
tax on such foreign company as has outsourced its activity to India. This policy is
on the lines of OECD norms and double taxation avoidance agreements.
31.
It is also the conviction of the Government that for the salaried class, which
doubtless has the best track record of tax compliance, the issue of revising the
standard deduction for Income Tax purposes has now to be revisited. Furthermore,
the tax treatment of family pension of war widows merits a review so as to enable
them to live a life of dignity. We also need to revisit the present exemption limits and
to realign them appropriately.
Indirect

taxes

32.
For consolidating the growth process,
announced some measures on January 8, 2004.
necessary. I shall not repeat them.

the Government has already
These steps were timely and

Capital goods
33.
To enable our domestic industry to compete with imported capital goods,
which are currently subject to a 10 per cent basic customs duty, I have already
reduced such duty on a number of raw materials, intermediates and components for
their manufacture. This has removed an anomaly.
34.
A suggestion has been made that wherever there is exemption from
countervailing duty on an imported capital good, deemed export benefits ought to be

9

given to the very same capital good, indigenously manufactured. There already exists
a scheme for giving deemed export benefits for specified projects, where procurement
is through international competitive bidding. Ministry of Finance, in consultation
with Ministry of Commerce, will nevertheless, examine this suggestion in order to
provide a level playing field to domestic manufacturers.
Power
35.
The Task Force on Power Sector Investment and Reforms has recommended
exploring the possibility of making countervailing duty for the power sector cenvatable.
This suggestion, too, will be examined.
36.
In the last budget, exemption from excise duty on residual fuel oils for
generation of power, available only to units licensed under the Electricity Act 1910,
was extended to generating companies licensed under the Electricity Supply Act
1948. It has been requested that this exemption, for units licensed under the 1948
Act, may now be made applicable retrospectively, whenever electricity was supplied
to State Electricity Boards, and the cost of generation was governed by power purchase
agreements. I believe that a suitable legislative measure for a retrospective exemption
of this nature should be considered.
Baggage rules
37.
To further reduce congestion at the customs counters in the arrival halls of
our international airports, free baggage allowance is being raised from Rs.12,000 to
Rs.25,000. Customs duty on such baggage is also being reduced from 50 per cent to
40 per cent. This will be effective from today.
User-friendly tax administration
38.
The move towards an improved tax administration through greater
application of IT, and a discretion-free, impersonal system with lower compliance
costs must continue. It is with this objective in mind, that I am pleased to announce
♦

round the clock electronic filing of customs documents for clearance of
goods, presently available in 9 customs formations will be extended to 23
customs formations by March 31, 2004;

♦

customs clearance will be based
examination from June 30, 2004;

♦

an 8-digit code classification of goods for the levy of excise will be adopted
by September 30, 2004, to bring greater transparency, avoid classification
dispute, and harmonise excise classification with customs and EXIM Policy
nomenclature;

♦

compounding of offences under Union excise rules, for quick settlement of
disputes, will be introduced from June 30, 2004; and

♦

e-filing of excise returns will be introduced from June 30, 2004 to enhance
excise automation and for better reconciliation of revenue accounts.

on

self-assessment

and

selective

Service tax
39.
To enable levy of tax on services as a specific and important source of
revenue, an amendment to the Constitution is already in progress. In the interim,

10

the service tax was extended to seven new services in the last Budget. To facilitate
the filing of returns and to reduce the compliance cost under this important source
of revenue, I am glad to announce that from January 2, 2004
♦

only a simple verification is being made for grant of registration for
service tax;

♦

there is a single registration and single return for assesses providing more
than one taxable service; and

♦

service tax automation has been enhanced by extending e-filing of
returns and also their electronic scrutiny from 10 services to all the 58
taxable services.
IV. REVISED AND BUDGET ESTIMATES

40.
I must now inform the House about the essentials of our book-keeping for
the current year, as also for 2004-05.
Revised Estimates for 2003-2004
41.
The Revised Estimates show a net decrease in expenditure of Rs.11,143
crore as compared to the Budget estimates. This reduction in expenditure has
been achieved despite additional expenditure on Rural Development, the Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan, the Delhi Metro Rail Project and additional budgetary support
for the Railways.
42.
Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated at Rs.187,539 crore compared
to the Budget estimate of Rs.184,169 crore, an increase of Rs.3,370 crore. Non tax
revenue is estimated at Rs.75,488 crore, Rs.5722 crore more than the estimated
level of Rs.69,766 crore. Disinvestment receipts, at Rs.14,500 crore, are also higher
than the budget estimate of Rs.13,200 crore.
43.
The revised revenue receipts of the Centre are estimated at Rs.263,027
crore, the fiscal deficit at Rs.132,103 crore which is 4.8 per cent of the estimated
GDP and the revenue deficit at Rs.99,860 crore which is 3.6 per cent of the
estimated GDP.
44.
I trust Sir, that Hon’ble Members would observe, and approve of the fact
that the Government has demonstrated its resolve about fiscal consolidation by
performing better than the budgeted targets.
Budget Estimates for 2004-2005
45.
In the budget estimates for 2004-2005, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.457,434 crore, of which Rs.135,071 crore is for Plan and Rs.322,363 crore
for non-Plan.
Plan expenditure
46.
In order to strike the right balance between the developmental needs on
one hand and fiscal stability on the other, the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for
Plan 2004-05 has been fixed at Rs.135,071 crore. This is Rs.14,097 crore more than
last year, indicating an increase of 11.6 per cent. Out of this, an amount of Rs.81,367

11

crore is being provided as Budget support for Central Plan. This is an increase of
Rs.9,215 crore, or 12.8 per cent, over the last year. Similarly, the Central Assistance
for State Plans is Rs.53,704 crore, which is Rs.4,882 crore more than last year. Should
need arise for new schemes, such as Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA),
the Government will then provide additional allocations for such schemes.
Non-plan Expenditure
47.
The budget estimates for 2004-2005 show a net increase of Rs.16,218 crore
in non-plan expenditure. The increase is mainly in interest payments and debt
servicing (Rs.4,945 crore), defence (Rs.5,700 crore), grants and loans to State
Governments (Rs.4,110 crore) and food subsidy (Rs.2,600 crore).
Revenue estimate and Fiscal deficit
48.
Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these proposals I estimate total revenue receipts of
the Centre at Rs.290,882 crore, the fiscal deficit at Rs.136,452 crore, which is 4.4
per cent of the estimated GDP and the revenue deficit at Rs.89,860 crore, which is
2.9 per cent of the estimated GDP.
V. CONCLUSION
49.
Sir, I had the honour of being given the responsibility of the Ministry of
Finance in July, 2002. I have served here for just about a year and a half. During this
period it has been my privilege to see the Indian economy enter onto a sustained and
robust growth path of around 7.5 to 8 per cent per year. This has been possible only
because of the reforms pursued by the NDA, as well as by earlier Governments, of the
contribution in this Ministry of my distinguished predecessor, Shri Yashwant Sinha,
and above all, of the support and leadership provided by Prime Minister Vajpayee.
50.
Under the stewardship of Shri Vajpayee, the NDA Government, since March
19, 1998, has not only successfully weathered the post-Pokhran economic sanctions;
East Asian crisis; at least two major destructive cyclones; an unprecedented drought;
the devastating Bhuj earthquake; two border stand-offs; the challenge of terrorism
and insurgency; the gulf war; a global downturn; uncertainty in oil prices, all these
and much else. Despite these multiple challenges, the Government, during this
period, brought down the fiscal deficit to 4.8 per cent of GDP, the revenue deficit to
3.6 per cent, and contained annual average inflation at around 4.8 per cent. Our
revenue collection in the period 1998-2004, has gone up by about 83 per cent, our
capital markets are healthy, the UTI is a market leader again, our foreign exchange
reserves have nearly quadrupled to the never ever achieved level of over $100 billion,
our GDP, in this period, has increased by almost 40 per cent, and to my belief,
national contentment, national confidence, and our collective resolve for achieving
even higher growth has now taken firm root.
51.

Sir, I commend this interim budget to the House.

