CONTENTS
PART-A
Page No.
Introduction

1

Aspirational India

6



Agriculture, Irrigation & Rural Development



Wellness, Water & Sanitation



Education & Skills

Economic Development


Industry, Commerce & Investment



Infrastructure



New Economy

Caring Society


Women, Child & Social Welfare



Culture & Tourism



Environment & Climate Change

12

19

Governance

23

Financial Sector

25



Financial Markets



Infrastructure Financing



Disinvestment

Fiscal Management

29

(ii)

PART B

Direct

32



Personal Income Tax and simplification of taxation



Dividend Distribution Tax



Concessional tax rate for Electricity generation companies














Tax concession for foreign investments
Start-ups
Concessional tax rate for Co-operatives
Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME
Affordable housing
Concession to real estate transactions
Charity institutions
Faceless appeals
No Dispute but Trust Scheme – ‘Vivad Se Vishwas’Scheme
Losses of merged banks
Taxpayer’s Charter
Instant PAN through Aadhaar

Indirect Tax

41

Annexures
Annexures to Part A of the Speech






44

Budget Outlay for Major Sectors
Major Scheme Allocation
Transfer of Resources to States and Union territories with Legislature
Allocation for Major Ministries / Departments
Statement of Extra Budgetary and Other Resources

Annexures to Part B of the Speech
Direct Tax
Indirect Tax

50

Budget 2020-2021
Speech of
Nirmala Sitharaman
Minister of Finance
February 1, 2020
Hon’ble Speaker,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 2020-2021.
Introduction
In May 2019, Prime Minister Modi received a massive mandate to
form the government again. With renewed vigour, under his leadership, we
commit ourselves to serve the people of India, with all humility and
dedication.
2.
People of India have unequivocally given their jan-aadesh for not
just political stability and also reposed faith in our economic policies. This is
the Budget to boost their incomes and enhance their purchasing power.
Only through higher growth we can achieve that and have our youth
gainfully and meaningfully employed. Let our businesses be innovative,
healthy and solvent with use of technology.
3.
For today’s youth born at the turn of the century, for every member
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who seeks a better life, for every
woman wishing to stand up and get counted, for every individual from the
minority sections of our society – this Budget aims to have your aspirations
and hopes addressed.
4.
We wish to open up vistas for a vibrant and dynamic economy with a
gentle breeze of new technology. This vibrant India shall be a caring society
which shall attend to its weak, the old and the vulnerable among its citizens.

2
5.
During 2014-19, our government brought in a paradigm shift in
governance. This shift was characterised by a twin focus: fundamental
structural reform and inclusive growth.
6.
Fundamentals of the economy are strong and that has ensured
macroeconomic stability. Inflation has been well contained. Banks saw a
thorough cleaning up of accumulated loans of the past decade and then
they were recapitalized. Companies were provided an exit through the IBC.
Several steps on the formalisation of the economy were taken up.
7.
Of the structural reforms, the Goods and Services Tax (GST) has
been the most historic in our country. Its chief architect is not with us
today. I pay homage to the visionary leader late Shri Arun Jaitley ji. At the
time of roll out of GST, he had said and I quote:
“It will be an India where the Centre and States will work harmoniously
towards the common goal of shared prosperity. The unanimity of the
Constitutional amendment and the consensus of the GST Council highlights
that India can rise above narrow politics for the nation’s interest. With the
GST, neither the state nor the Centre loses its sovereignty. In contrast, they
will pool their sovereignty on decisions on indirect taxes.”
8.
True to this vision for the historic structural reform, the Goods and
Services Tax has been gradually maturing into a tax that has integrated the
country economically. It has consolidated numerous taxes and cesses to one
tax and facilitated formalization of economy. It has resulted in the efficiency
gains in logistic and transport sectors. The turnaround time for trucks has
witnessed a substantial reduction to the tune of 20% due to abolition of
check posts in GST. The dreaded Inspector-Raj has also vanished.
9.
It has also led to significant benefits to MSME by way of enhanced
threshold and composition limits. The effective tax incidence on almost
every commodity came down substantially.
Through several rate
reductions, an annual benefit of ` one lakh crore has been extended to
consumers. It amounts to 10% reduction in overall tax incidence. An
average household now saves about 4% on its monthly spends on account
of reduced GST rates.
10.
During this phase of maturing, GST did face certain challenges. This
was natural as transition was daunting. GST Council has been proactive in
resolving issues during transition. In the last two years we have added
more than 60 lakh new taxpayers, a total of about 40 crore returns were

3
filed, 800 crore invoices were uploaded, and 105 crore e-way bills were
generated. There has been extensive engagement with stakeholders. A
simplified new return system is being introduced from April 1, 2020.
11.
A former Prime Minister had once voiced a concern that the fruits of
the welfare schemes were not reaching the intended citizens – the common
and deserving citizen was only receiving 15 paisa of every rupee sent for
him. Guided by “Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas”, our government
and our Prime Minister added manifold speed and scaled up the
implementation of schemes and programmes that directly benefitted the
poor and the disadvantaged. I wish to list out only a few as examples: (a)
welfare schemes with Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) embedded in them; (b)
sanitation and water as provision of basic needs and as a measure of
preventive healthcare; (c) healthcare, through Ayushman Bharat; (d) clean
energy through Ujjwala and solar power; (e) financial inclusion, credit
support, insurance protection to vulnerable sections and pension scheme;
(f) digital penetration with broadband and UPI; (g) Affordable Housing for all
through PMAY.
The milestones achieved are unprecedented, globally recognised
and benchmarked against international indices.
12.
This strategy, changed the established order of a few individuals
cornering most of the benefits and was appreciated by the people. This had
immensely positive outcomes. We have moved on from a growth rate of
just over 4% in 1950s to 6% in 1980s and1990s. However, during 2014-19
we clocked growth of 7.4% on average with inflation, averaging around
4.5%. It is worthwhile to note that inflation was close to 9% in the last two
decades of the last millennium and ranged 10.5% during 2009-14. Between
2006-16, India was able to raise 271 million people out of poverty, which we
all should be proud of.
13.
We are now the fifth largest economy of the world. India’s foreign
direct investment got elevated to the level of US$ 284 billion during 201419 from US$ 190 billioin that came in during the years 2009-14. The Central
Government debt that has been the bane of our economy got reduced, in
March 2019, to 48.7% of GDP from a level of 52.2%in March 2014.
14.
With this backdrop, our government shall work towards taking the
country forward so that we can leapfrog to the next level of health,
prosperity and well-being. We shall strive to bring Ease of living for every
citizen.

4
15.
I am mindful of presenting this budget in the backdrop of two crosscutting developments:
a) Proliferation of technologies, specially analytics, machine learning,
robotics, bio-informatics and Artificial Intelligence; and
b) The number of people in the productive age group i.e. 15-65 years in
India, being at its highest.
16.
This combination is special to contemporary India. Across the world,
if there is a shrinking of globalisation, equally, there is a debate on the
efficacy of monetary policy too. The efforts we have made in the last five
years and the energy, enthusiasm and the innovation of our youth are the
ignition required to push forward. The Indian spirit of entrepreneurship
which weathered several storms over the centuries inspire and motivate us.
We recognise the need to support and further energise this spirit.
17.

This budget is woven around three prominent themes:

One: Aspirational India in which all sections of the society seek
better standards of living, with access to health, education and better jobs.
Two: Economic development for all, indicated in the Prime
Minister’s exhortation of “Sabka Saath , Sabka Vikas , Sabka Vishwas”. This
would entail reforms across swathes of the economy. Simultaneously, it
would mean yielding more space for the private sector. Together, they
would ensure higher productivity and greater efficiency.
AND
Three: Ours shall be a Caring Society that is both humane and
compassionate. Antyodaya is an article of faith.
18.
The digital revolution which has placed India in a unique leadership
position globally will see the next wave. We shall aim:


To achieve seamless delivery of services through Digital
governance



To improve physical quality of life through National Infrastructure
Pipeline



Risk mitigation through Disaster Resilience



Social security through Pension and Insurance penetration.

Each one of these initiatives and their components would be benchmarked to international standards and the indices would be announced
soon.

5
19.
To Summarize my introductory remarks, this Budget Speaker Sir, is
dedicated to provide “Ease of Living” to all citizens. As mentioned, a little
earlier, the details under the three broad themes – Aspirational India,
Economic Development and Caring India are the flowers in the bouquet that
is Ease of Living. Holding this bouquet together are two hands – one,
Corruption free, policy-driven good governance and two, clean and sound
financial sector.
20.
The three themes described earlier form the basis of my subsequent
presentation. They are the flowers of the bouquet that underline the overall
concept of “Ease of Living” and need to uplift Governance, as pronounced
by our Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi. The chapter on Finances and
subsequent Part B on Taxes provide the necessary underpinning to the
Budget that lays the guide map for next year and beyond.
Before, I move to elaborate on each of the three themes, I wish to
recite a small verse in Kashmiri:

Saun Watan Gulzar Shalamaar Hyur
Dal Manz Pholvun Pamposh Hyuv
Navjavan-an-hund, Vushun Khumaar Hyuv
Myon Watan, Chyon Watan
Saun Watan, Nundbony Watan
(Everything that we do, all of us do, is for this beautiful country)
Poem by Pandit Dinanath Koul

6
Aspirational India
21.
I shall cover programmes and plans related to: (1) Agriculture
Irrigation and Rural development (2) Wellness, Water and Sanitation and (3)
Education and Skills
Agriculture, Irrigation and Rural Development
22.
Our government is committed to the goal of doubling farmers’
incomes by 2022. We have provided energy sovereignty through KUSUM
and input sovereignty through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana. We have
provided resilience for 6.11 crores farmers insured under PM Fasal Bima
Yojana. Focus on cultivation of pulses, expansion of micro-irrigation through
Krishi Sinchai Yojana, have raised the self-reliance of the country. Provision
of any annual supplement of the income to the farmer, directly is done
through PM-KISAN. Connectivity through PMGSY, financial inclusion have
helped raise farm incomes.
22 (1). Prosperity to farmers can be ensured by making farming
competitive. For this, farm markets need to be liberalised. Distortions in
farm and livestock markets need to be removed. Purchase of farm produce,
logistics and agri-services need copious investments. Substantial support
and hand-holding of farm-based activities such as livestock, apiary, and
fisheries need to be provided for. Farmers desire integrated solutions
covering storage, financing, processing and marketing.
23.
Adopting sustainable cropping patterns and bringing in more
technology are integral to our plan. All this and more can be achieved
through working with and in cooperation with the States.
The following 16 action points indicate our focus:
23 (1). We propose to encourage those State governments who undertake
implementation of following model laws already issued by the Central
government:
a) Model Agricultural Land Leasing Act, 2016
b) Model Agricultural Produce and Livestock
(Promotion and Facilitation) Act, 2017;, and

Marketing

7
c) Model Agricultural Produce and Livestock Contract Farming
and Services (Promotion and Facilitation) Act, 2018
23 (2). Water stress related issues are now a serious concern across the
country. Our government is proposing comprehensive measures for one
hundred water stressed districts.
23 (3). In the Budget speech of July 2019, I had stated that “annadata” can
be “urjadata” too. The PM-KUSUM scheme removed farmers’ dependence
on diesel and kerosene and linked pump sets to solar energy. Now, I
propose to expand the scheme to provide 20 lakh farmers for setting up
stand-alone solar pumps; further we shall also help another 15 lakh farmers
solarise their grid-connected pump sets. In addition, a scheme to enable
farmers to set up solar power generation capacity on their fallow/barren
lands and to sell it to the grid would be operationalized.
23 (4). Our government shall encourage balanced use of all kinds of
fertilizers including the traditional organic and other innovative fertilizers.
This is a necessary step to change the prevailing incentive regime, which
encourages excessive use of chemical fertilisers.
மி தி

தி உ
ஆ தி

– 82

Bhumi tiruthi Unn
-

Wise, Old Tamil Woman Saint poet Aauvaiyar – Sangam Era
"Aaathichoodi" verse 81

The meaning of this saying is that one must “first tend to till one's
land and then eat”. One must eat only after work.
23 (5). India has an estimated capacity of 162 million MT of agriwarehousing, cold storage, reefer van facilities etc. NABARD will undertake
an exercise to map and geo-tag them. In addition, we propose creating
warehousing, in line with Warehouse Development and Regulatory
Authority (WDRA) norms. Our government will provide Viability Gap
Funding for setting up such efficient warehouses at the block/taluk level.
This can be achieved, where States can facilitate with land and are on a PPP
mode.
Food Corporation of India (FCI) and Central Warehousing
Corporation (CWC) shall undertake such warehouse building on their land
too.

8
23 (6). As a backward linkage, a Village Storage scheme is proposed to be
run by the SHGs. This will provide farmers a good holding capacity and
reduce their logistics cost. Women, SHGs shall regain their position as
“Dhaanya Lakshmi”.
23 (7). To build a seamless national cold supply chain for perishables,
inclusive of milk, meat and fish, the Indian Railways will set up a “Kisan Rail”
– through PPP arrangements. There shall be refrigerated coaches in Express
and Freight trains as well.
23 (8). Krishi Udaan will be launched by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
international and national routes. This will immensely help improve value
realisation especially in North-East and tribal districts.
23 (9). Horticulture sector with its current produce of 311million MT
exceeds production of food grains. For better marketing and export, we
propose supporting States which, adopting a cluster basis, will focus on
“one product one district”.
23 (10). Integrated farming systems in rainfed areas shall be expanded.
Multi-tier cropping, bee-keeping, solar pumps, solar energy production in
non-cropping season will be added. Zero-Budget Natural Farming
(mentioned in July 2019 budget) shall also be included. The portal on “jaivik
kheti” – online national organic products market will also be strengthened.
23 (11). Financing on Negotiable Warehousing Receipts (e-NWR) has
crossed more than`6000 crore. This will be integrated with e-NAM.
23 (12). Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs)and cooperatives are
active in the agriculture credit space. The NABARD re-finance scheme will
be further expanded. Agriculture credit target for the year 2020-21 has
been set at ` 15 lakh crore. All eligible beneficiaries of PM-KISAN will be
covered under the KCC scheme.
23 (13). Our government intends to eliminate Foot and Mouth disease,
brucellosis in cattle and also peste des petits ruminants (PPR) in sheep and
goat by 2025. Coverage of artificial insemination shall be increased from
the present 30% to 70%. MNREGS would be dovetailed to develop fodder
farms. Further, we shall facilitate doubling of milk processing capacity from
53.5 million MT to 108 million MT by 2025.
23 (14). Blue Economy: Our government proposes to put in place a
framework for development, management and conservation of marine
fishery resources.

9
23 (15). Youth in coastal areas benefit through fish processing and
marketing. By 2022-23, I propose raising fish production to 200 lakh
tonnes. Growing of algae, sea-weed and cage Culture will also be promoted.
Our government will involve youth in fishery extension through 3477
Sagar Mitras and 500 Fish Farmer Producer Organisations. We hope to raise
fishery exports to ` 1 lakh crore by 2024-25.
23 (16). Under Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana for alleviation of poverty, 58
lakh SHGs have been mobilised. We shall further expand on SHGs.
24.
Now, for the fund allocation for the 16 different steps mentioned
above, they are being stated under two different categories:
For the sector comprising of Agriculture and allied activities,
Irrigation and Rural Development an allocation of about ` 2.83 lakh crore
has been made for the year 2020-21 . Its divided, inter-alia;
a) For Agriculture, Irrigation & allied activities

- ` 1.60 lakh crore

b) For Rural development & Panchayati Raj

- ` 1.23 lakh crore

Wellness, Water and Sanitation
Under Aspirational India, I shall now speak about Wellness, Water and
Sanitation.
25.
We have a holistic vision of healthcare that translates into wellness
of the citizen. Mission Indradhanush has been expanded to cover 12 such
diseases, including five new vaccines. FIT India movement is a vital part of
fight against Non communicable diseases coming out of life style issues . A
very focused safe water (Jal Jeevan Mission) and comprehensive sanitation
program (Swachch Bharat Mission) have been launched to support the
health vision. That would reduce the disease burden on the poor.
26.
Presently, under PM Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) ,there are more
than 20,000 empanelled hospitals. We need more in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities
for poorer people under this scheme.

10
26 (1). It is proposed to set up Viability Gap funding window for setting up
hospitals in the PPP mode. In the first phase, those Aspirational Districts will
be covered, where presently there are no Ayushman empanelled hospitals.
This would also provide large scale employment opportunities to youth.
Proceeds from taxes on medical devices would be used to support this vital
health infrastructure
26 (2). Using machine learning and AI, in the Ayushman Bharat scheme,
health authorities and the medical fraternity can target disease with an
appropriately designed Preventive regime.
27.
“TB Harega Desh Jeetega” campaign has been launched. I propose to
strengthen these efforts realise our commitment to end Tuberculosis by
2025.
28.
I propose to expand Jan Aushadhi Kendra Scheme to all districts
offering 2000 medicines and 300 surgicals by 2024.
I have provided for the health sector about `69,000 crores that is
inclusive of ` 6400 crores for Prime Minister Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY)
29.
Our government is committed to ODF Plus in order to sustain ODF
behaviour and to ensure that no one is left behind. Now, more needs to be
done towards liquid and grey water management. Focus would also be on
Solid waste collection, source segregation and processing.
Total allocation for Swachh Bharat Mission is about `12,300 crore in
2020-21.
30.
Aiming to provide piped water supply to all households, Prime
Minister announced from the Red Fort the Jal Jeevan Mission. Our
government has approved `3.60 lakh crore for this Mission. This scheme
also places emphasis on augmenting local water sources, recharging existing
sources and will promote water harvesting and de-salination. Cities with
over a million population will be encouraged to meeting this objective
during the current year itself.
During the year 2020-21 the scheme would be provided budget of
` 11,500 crore.

11
Education and Skills
The third and the final item under Aspirational India is Education
and Skills.
31.
By 2030, India is set to have the largest working-age population in
the world. Not only do they need literacy but they need both job and life
skills. Dialogues have been held with State Education Ministries, Members
of Parliament and other stake-holders about Education policy. Over 2 lakh
suggestions were also received. The New Education Policy will be
announced soon.
32.
It is felt that our education system needs greater inflow of finance to
attract talented teachers, innovate and build better labs. Therefore steps
would be taken to enable sourcing External Commercial Borrowings and FDI
so as to able to deliver higher quality education.
33.
Students in the general stream (vis-à-vis services or technology
stream) need their employability improved. About 150 higher educational
institutions will start apprenticeship embedded degree/diploma courses by
March 2021.
34.
The government proposes to start a programme whereby urban
local bodies across the country would provide internship opportunities to
fresh engineers for a period up to one year.
35.
In order to provide quality education to students of deprived section
of the society as well as those who do not have access to higher education,
it is proposed to start degree level full-fledged online education
programme. This shall be offered only by institutions who are ranked within
top 100 in the National Institutional Ranking framework. Initially, only a few
such institutions would be asked to offer such programmes.
36.
India should be a preferred destination for higher education. Hence,
under its “Study in India” programme, Ind-SAT is proposed to be held in
Asian and African countries. It shall be used for benchmarking foreign
candidates who receive scholarships for studying in Indian higher education
centres.

12
37.
A National Police University and a National Forensic Science
University are being proposed in the domain of policing science, forensic
science, cyber-forensics etc.
38.
There is a shortage of qualified medical doctors, both general
practitioners as well as specialists. In order to meet this requirement;
38 (1). It is proposed to attach a medical college to an existing district
hospital in PPP mode. Those states that fully allow the facilities of the
hospital to the medical college and wish to provide land at a concession,
would be able to receive Viability Gap Funding. Details of the scheme would
be worked out.
38 (2). National Board of Examination imparts PG medical qualifications ;
Diploma and fellow of National Board (DNB/FNB). The Government will,
therefore encourage large hospitals with sufficient capacity to offer resident
doctors DNB/FNB courses under the National Board of Examinations.
39.
There exists a huge demand for teachers, nurses, para-medical staff
and care-givers abroad. However, their skill sets, many a time, do not
match the employer’s standards and therefore need to be improved. I
propose that special bridge courses be designed by the Ministries of Health,
Skill Development together with professional bodies to bring in equivalence.
Language requirements of various countries need also to be included. All
these should be achieved through special training packages.
Our Government proposes to provide about ` 99,300 crore for
education sector in 2020-21 and about ` 3,000 crores for skill development.
Economic Development
Industry, Commerce and Investment
The guilds of Saraswati-Sindhu civilization & the Harappan seals are
remarkable. They belong to 3300 BCE. Words from the Indus Scripthieroglyphs have been deciphered. Commerce and trade related words
show how India for a millennia is continuing as rich in skills, metallurgy,
trade etc. “Takara Kolimi=Tin smithery”, “ Sreni “= Guild ,” Sethi”=
wholesale merchant, “Poddar”= Assayer of metal into treasury.

13
40.
Entrepreneurship has always been the strength of India. Even today,
young men and women have given up greener pastures elsewhere to
contribute to India’s growth. They are risk-taking and come up with
disruptive solutions to festering challenges. Equally, established old
industries are resetting themselves in a changing global and domestic
situation. We recognise the knowledge, skills and risk-taking capabilities of
our youth. He is no longer the job seeker. He is creator of jobs. Now we
wish to create more opportunities and remove road-blocks from his path.
I propose to set up an Investment Clearance Cell that will provide
“end to end” facilitation and support, including pre-investment advisory,
information related to land banks and facilitate clearances at Centre and
State level. It will work through a portal.
41.
There is a case for maximising the benefits of three separately
developing economic activities: (1) the upcoming economic corridors; (2)
revitalisation of manufacturing activities; and (3) Technology and the
demands of aspirational classes. We have to benefit from their
convergence. Hence, it is proposed to develop five new smart cities in
collaboration with States in PPP mode. Such sites would be chosen that
offer the best choices in terms of aforementioned principles.
42.
India needs to manufacture Networked products. That will make it a
part of global value chains. This in turn gets more investment and generates
more employment for our youth.
42 (1). Electronics manufacturing industry is very competitive and India has
shown its cost advantages. The potential of this industry in job creation is
immense. India needs to boost domestic manufacturing and attract large
investments in the electronics value chain. Here, I propose a scheme
focussed on encouraging manufacture of mobile phones, electronic
equipment and semi-conductor packaging. Details would be announced
later.
42(2). With suitable modifications, this scheme can be adapted for
manufacture of medical devices too
43.
India imports significant quantity of technical textiles worth US$ 16
billion every year. To reverse this trend and to position India as a global

14
leader in Technical Textiles, a National Technical Textiles Mission is
proposed with a four-year implementation period from 2020-21 to 2023-24
at an estimated outlay of ` 1480 crore.
44.
From the Red Fort, our Prime Minister spoke about quality and
standards when he spoke of “Zero Defect-Zero Effect” manufacturing. In
September last year, I had called for a time-bound adoption by industry of
all necessary, mandatory technical standards and their effective
enforcement. All Ministries, during the course of this year, would be issuing
quality standard orders.
45.
To achieve higher export credit disbursement, a new scheme, NIRVIK
is being launched, which provides for higher insurance coverage, reduction
in premium for small exporters and simplified procedure for claim
settlements.
46.
It is proposed to digitally refund to exporters, duties and taxes levied
at the Central, State and local levels, such as electricity duties and VAT on
fuel used for transportation, which are not getting exempted or refunded
under any other existing mechanism. This Scheme for Reversion of duties
and taxes on exported products will be launched this year.
47.
It is the vision of the Prime Minister that each District should
develop as an export hub. Efforts of the Centre and State governments are
being synergised and institutional mechanisms are being created.
48.
Government e-Marketplace (GeM) is moving ahead for creating a
Unified Procurement System in the country for providing a single platform
for procurement of goods, services and works. It offers a great opportunity
for Medium, Small and micro Enterprises(MSMEs). 3.24 lakh vendors are
already on this platform. Its proposed to take its turnover to ` 3lakh crores.
I propose to provide about ` 27,300 crore for development and
promotion of Industry and Commerce for the year 2020-21.
Under the theme “Economic Development”, the second focus is on
Infrastructure.

15
Infrastructure
49.
Hon’ble Speaker, Sir, in his Independence Day speech 2019, Prime
Minister had highlighted that ` 100 lakh crore would be invested on
infrastructure over the next 5 years. As a follow up measure, I had launched
the National Infrastructure Pipeline on 31st December 2019 of ` 103 lakh
crore. It consists of more than 6500 projects across sectors and are
classified as per their size and stage of development.
These new projects will include housing, safe drinking water, access
to clean and affordable energy, healthcare for all, world-class educational
institutes, modern railway stations, airports, bus terminals, metro and
railway transportation, logistics and warehousing, irrigation projects, etc.
The National Infrastructure Pipeline envisions improving the ease of living
for each individual citizen in the country. It’s also will bring in generic and
sectoral reforms in development, operation and maintenance of these
infrastructure projects.
A huge employment opportunity exists for India’s youth in
construction, operation and maintenance of infrastructure. National Skill
Development Agency will give special thrust to infrastructure-focused skill
development opportunities.
50 (1). I propose to set up a project preparation facility for infrastructure
projects. This programme would actively involve young engineers,
management graduates and economists from our Universities.
50 (2). It is also proposed to direct all infrastructure agencies of the
government to involve youth-power in start-ups. They will help in rolling
out value added services in quality public infrastructure for citizens.
51.
A National Logistics Policy will be released soon. Inter alia; it will
clarify the roles of the Union Government, State Governments and key
regulators. It will create a single window e-logistics market and focus on
generation of employment, skills and making MSMEs competitive.
52.
Accelerated development of highways will be undertaken. This will
include development of 2500 Km access control highways, 9000 Km of
economic corridors, 2000 Km of coastal and land port roads and 2000 Km of
strategic highways.

16
Delhi-Mumbai Expressway and two other packages would be
completed by 2023 . Chennai-Bengaluru Expressway would also be started.
53.
FASTag
mechanism
encourages
us
towards
greater
commercialisation of our highways so that NHAI can raise more resources. I
propose to monetise at least twelve lots of highway bundles of over 6000
Km before 2024.
54.
In carrying out its duty, the Indian Railways performs a service to the
nation.
a) Within 100 days of assumption of this government, it has
commissioned 550 wi-fi facilities in as many stations.
b) Eliminated unmanned crossings
c) Aims to achieve electrification of 27000 Km of tracks.
This will call for optimisation of costs. Railways has small operating
surplus. About Indian Railways, there are five measures, among others, that
I wish to highlight:


Setting up a large solar power capacity alongside the rail tracks, on
the land owned by the railways. A proposal is under consideration.



Four station re-development projects and operation of 150
passenger trains would be done through PPP mode. The process of
inviting private participation is underway.



More Tejas type trains will connect iconic tourist destinations.



High speed train between Mumbai to Ahmedabad would be actively
pursued.



148 km long Bengaluru Suburban transport project at a cost of
` 18600 crore, would have fares on metro model. Central
Government would provide 20% of equity and facilitate external
assistance up to 60% of the project cost.

17
55.
Our sea-ports need to be more efficient. Technology has to used to
improve performance. A governance framework keeping with global
benchmarks needs to be put in place.
This government would consider corporatizing at least one major
port and subsequently its listing on the stock exchanges.
56.
Inland Waterways received a boost in the last five years. The Jal
Vikas Marg on National Waterway-1 will be completed. Further, the 890 Km
Dhubri-Sadiya connectivity will be done by 2022.
Developing waterways has its impact on the eco-system on both the
banks of the river. Our Prime Minister has conceptualised “Arth Ganga”.
Plans are afoot to energise economic activity along river banks.
57.
Air traffic has been growing rapidly in the country as compared to
global average. One hundred more airports would be developed by 2024 to
support Udaan scheme. It is expected that the air fleet number shall go up
from the present 600 to 1200 during this time.
I propose to provide about ` 1.70 lakh crore for transport
Infrastructure in 2020-21.
58.
Taking electricity to every household has been a major achievement.
However, the distribution sector, particularly the DISCOMS are under
financial stress. The Ministry intends to promote “smart” metering. I urge
all the States and Union Territories to replace conventional energy meters
by prepaid smart meters in the next 3 years. Also, this would give
consumers the freedom to choose the supplier and rate as per their
requirements.
Further measure to reform DISCOMs would be taken.
I propose to provide about ` 22,000 crore to power and renewable
energy sector in 2020-21
59.
In the upstream sector of oil and gas, the Open Acreage Licensing
Policy (OALP) is a success having awarded 1,37,000 sq km for exploration to
private sector and to the CPSEs. City gas distribution rights are also
awarded.

18
60 (1). Further, it is proposed to expand the national gas grid from the
present 16200 km to 27000 km, and
60 (2). To deepen gas markets in India, further reforms will be undertaken
to facilitate transparent price discovery and ease of transactions.
New Economy
61.
The new economy is based on innovations that disrupt established
business models. Artificial intelligence, Internet-of-Things (IoT), 3D printing,
drones, DNA data storage, quantum computing, etc., are re-writing the
world economic order. India has already embraced new paradigms such as
the sharing economy with aggregator platforms displacing conventional
businesses. Government has harnessed new technologies to enable direct
benefit transfers and financial inclusion on a scale never imagined before.
62.
It is now a cliché – “data is the new oil” and it is true that Analytics,
Fintech and Internet of Things (IOT) are changing the way we deal with our
lives. To take advantage of this, I propose:
62 (1). To bring out soon a policy to enable private sector to build Data
Centre parks throughout the country. It will enable our firms to skilfully
incorporate data in every step of their value chains.
62 (2). Our vision is that all “public institutions” at Gram Panchayat level
such as Anganwadis, health and wellness centres, government schools, PDS
outlets, post offices and police stations will be provided with digital
connectivity. So, Fibre to the Home (FTTH) connections through Bharatnet
will link 100,000 gram panchayats this year.
It is proposed to provide ` 6000 crore to Bharatnet programme
in 2020-21.
63.
We need to expand the base for knowledge-driven enterprises.
Intellectual property creation and protection will play an important role.
Several measures are proposed in this regard, which will benefit the Startups.

19
63 (1). A digital platform would be promoted that would facilitate seamless
application and capture of IPRs. Also, in an Institute of Excellence, a Centre
would be established that would work on the complexity and innovation in
the field of Intellectual Property.
63 (2). Knowledge Translation Clusters would be set up across different
technology sectors including new and emerging areas.
63 (3). For designing, fabrication and validation of proof of concept, and
further scaling up Technology Clusters, harbouring such test beds and small
scale manufacturing facilities would be established.
63 (4). Mapping of India’s genetic landscape is critical for next generation
medicine, agriculture and for bio-diversity management. To support this
development, we will initiate two new national level Science Schemes, to
create a comprehensive database.
63 (5). The government proposes to provide early life funding, including a
seed fund to support ideation and development of early stage Start-ups.
64.
Quantum technology is opening up new frontiers in computing,
communications, cyber security with wide-spread applications. It is
expected that lots of commercial applications would emerge from
theoretical constructs which are developing in this area.
It is proposed to provide an outlay of ` 8000 crore over a period five
years for the National Mission on Quantum Technologies and Applications.
Caring Society
In our third theme we focus on Women & Child, Social Welfare;
Culture and Tourism and also on Environment and Climate Change.
Women & Child, Social Welfare
65.
I am pleased to inform the House that “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao”
has yielded tremendous results. Gross enrolment ratio of girls across all
levels of education is now higher than boys. At elementary level, it is 94.32
% as against 89.28% for boys. At Secondary level, it is 81.32 % as compared
to 78 %, At higher secondary level girls have achieved a level of 59.70 % as
compared to 57.54 % for boys.

20
66.
Health of mother and child are closely corelated. Nutrition is the
critical component of health. To improve the nutritional status of children
(0-6 years), adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers, our
Prime Minister launched a “Poshan Abhiyan” in 2017-18. More than six
lakh anganwadi workers are equipped with smart phones to upload the
nutritional status of more than 10 crore households. The scale of these
developments is unprecedented.
67.
Women’s age of marriage was increased from fifteen years to
eighteen years in 1978, by amending erstwhile Sharda Act of 1929. As India
progresses further, opportunities open up for women to pursue higher
education and careers. There are imperatives of lowering MMR as well as
improvement of nutrition levels. Entire issue about age of a girl entering
motherhood needs to be seen in this light. I propose to appoint a task force
that will present its recommendations in six months’ time.
I propose to provide ` 35600 crore for nutrition-related programmes
for the financial year 2020-21.
68.
In continuing with our government’s commitment to the welfare of
women, this budget provides for about ` 28,600 crore for programs that are
specific to women.
69.
Our government is determined that there shall be no manual
cleaning of sewer systems or septic tanks. Suitable technologies for such
tasks have been identified by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. The
Ministry is working with urban local bodies for the adoption of these
technologies. We will now take this to its logical conclusion through
legislative and institutional changes. Financial support for wider acceptance
of such technologies will be provided.
70
In furthering this government’s commitment towards the welfare of
Scheduled Castes and Other Backward classes, I propose a budget provision
of about ` 85,000 crore for 2020-21.
71. In furthering development and welfare of Scheduled tribes, I provide in
the Budget for the year 2020-21 an amount of about ` 53,700 crore.

21
72.
This government is mindful of the concerns of senior citizens and
Divyang. Accordingly, an enhanced allocation of about ` 9,500 crore is being
provided for 2020-21.
Culture & Tourism
73.
Our government proposes to establish an Indian Institute of
Heritage and Conservation under Ministry of Culture; it shall have the status
of a deemed University to start with. Acquisition of knowledge in disciplines
such as museology and archaeology are essential for collecting and
analysing scientific evidence of such findings and for dissemination through
high quality museums. Currently lack of trained man-power is a handicap
for both these disciplines. This also affects tourism.
74.
Five archaeological sites would be developed as iconic sites with onsite Museums. They are: Rakhigarhi (Haryana), Hastinapur (Uttar Pradesh)
Shivsagar (Assam), Dholavira (Gujarat) and Adichanallur (Tamil Nadu).
75.
Our Prime Minister in January 2020 announced re-curation of the
Indian Museum in Kolkata, which is the oldest in the country.
75 (1). In the historic Old Mint building Kolkata, a museum on Numismatics
and Trade will also be located. Four more museums from across the
country shall be taken up for renovation and re-curation so that a world
class experience can be offered to visitors. Our government shall also
supportsetting up of a Tribal Museum in Ranchi (Jharkhand).
75 (2). A maritime museum would be set up at Lothal - the Harrapan age
maritime site near Ahmedabad, by Ministry of Shipping.
I propose to provide ` 3,150 crore for Ministry of Culture for
2020-21.
76.
India has moved up from rank 65 in 2014 to 34 in 2019 in the Travel
& Tourism Competitive Index (World Economic Forum). Foreign exchange
earnings grew 7.4% to `1.88 lakh crores for the period January to
November 2019 from `1.75 lakh crores

22
Growth of tourism directly relates to growth and employment.
States have a critical role to play. I expect the State governments to develop
a roadmap for certain identified destinations and formulate financial plans
during 2021 against which specified grants will be made available to the
States in 2020-21.
For purpose of tourism promotion, I propose to allocate ` 2,500
crore for 2020-21.
Environment & Climate Change
77.
In September 2019, the Prime Minister has launched the Coalition
for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) with its Secretariat in Delhi. This
global partnership is the second such international initiative after the
launch of International Solar Alliance in 2015. This Global Partnership will
help in addressing a number of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as
also the aims of Sendai framework. It will enhance climate change
adaptation with a focus on disaster resilient infrastructure
78.
India submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution, under the
Paris Agreement in 2015 on a “best effort” basis, keeping in mind the
development imperative of the country. Its implementation effectively
begins on 1st January 2021. Our commitments as action will be executed in
various sectors by the Departments/Ministries concerned through the
normal budgeting process.
79.
There are yet, thermal power plants that are old and their carbon
emission levels are high.
For such power plants, we propose that utilities running them would
be advised to close them, if their emission is above the pre-set norms. The
land so vacated can be put to alternative use.
80.
In large cities having population above one million, clean air is a
matter of concern. The government proposes to encourage such States that
are formulating and implementing plans for ensuring cleaner air in cities
above one million. Parameters for the incentives would be notified by the
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change. Allocation for this
purpose is `4400 crore for 2020-21.

23
ந
பணய
அண ெய

ைம,
ப நா

ெச

ல நா

வ
ைவ

வ ைளவ

ப

ஏம

.
ற

- 738

(The meaning of this kural is that Freedom from illness, wealth, produce,
happiness and protection (to subjects); these five, are the ornaments of a
kingdom).
Governance
81.
Hon’ble Speaker, Sir, all the while I have explained the colour and
composition of the bouquet of flowers – schemes and programmes. They
were grouped under Aspirational India, Economic Development and Caring
India. Now I speak about the two hands that will hold them. One such hand
is Governance – clean, corruption-free, policy driven and good in intent and
most importantly trusting in faith. Trusting every citizen, the aspirational
youth, the hard-working women, the risk-taking entrepreneur, the ever
hopeful and untiring farmer or the wise and old senior citizen. Many among
them are taxpayers. Others may not be taxpayers today. Our Prime
Minister has laid before us Ease of Living as a goal to be achieved on behalf
of all citizens. An important aspect of both ease of living and ease of doing
business is fairness and efficiency of tax administration. We wish to
enshrine in the statutes a “taxpayer charter” through this budget. Our
government would like to reassure taxpayers that we remain committed to
taking measures so that our citizens are free from harassment of any kind.
82.
There has been a debate about building into statutes, criminal
liability for acts that are civil in nature. Hence, for Companies Act, certain
amendments are proposed to be made that will correct this. Similarly, other
laws would also be examined, where such provisions exist and attempts
would be made to correct them.
83.
The Government intends to introduce major reforms in recruitment
to Non-Gazetted posts in governments and public sector banks. At present,
candidates have to appear for multiple examinations conducted by multiple
agencies at different points of time, for similar posts This places enormous

24
burden on time, effort and cost of young people. To mitigate their hardship
faced, it is proposed to set up a National Recruitment Agency (NRA) as an
independent, professional, specialist organisation for conduct of a
computer-based online Common Eligibility Test for recruitment to NonGazetted posts. A test-centre in every district, particularly in the
Aspirational Districts would be set up.
84.
For speedy disposal of commercial and other disputes, Government
has constituted various Tribunals and specialised bodies. It is proposed to
evolve a robust mechanism for appointment including direct recruitment to
these bodies to attract best talents and professional experts.
85.
A stable and predictable business environment is a key objective of
this government. There is also a strong argument for ensuring that
contracts are honoured. India has a sound framework related to Contracts
Act. We shall deliberate upon strengthening it.
86.
There is a growing need for the Indian Statistical system to meet the
challenges of real time monitoring of our increasingly complex economy.
Data must have strong credibility. The proposed new National Policy on
Official Statistics would use latest technology including AI. It would lay down
a road-map towards modernised data collection, integrated information
portal and timely dissemination of information.
87.
I am happy to inform that India will host G 20 presidency in the year
2022 - the year of 75th anniversary of independence of Indian Nation. During
this presidency, India would be able to drive considerably the global
economic and development agenda. For this historic occasion, I allocate a
sum of ` 100 crore to begin the preparations.
88.
North Eastern region has a very high priority in Government’s
Developmental agenda. Government is ensuring smooth access to financial
assistance from multilateral and bilateral funding agencies to help introduce
innovative and global best practices. Central Government has effectively
used an online portal to reduce gestation period of online. This has
improved the flow of funds to the northeast region.
89.
The Government is fully committed to supporting the all-round
development of the newly formed Union Territories of J&K and the Union

25
Territory of Ladakh. Accordingly, an amount of `30,757 crore has been
provided for the Financial Year 2020-21. An amount of `5,958 crore has
been provided for the Union Territory of Ladakh
Financial Sector
90.
If Governance was described as one of the pair of hands holding the
bouquet consisting of Aspirational India, Economic Development and Caring
India, the other is the Financial Sector. A clean, reliable and robust financial
sector is critical to the economy. In our efforts to achieve the USD 5 trillion
economy, the financial architecture should keep evolving and move from
strength to strength.
91.
We had earlier approved consolidation of 10 banks into four. In the
last few years, Government of India has infused about ` 3,50,000 crore by
way of capital into Public Sector Banks for regulatory and growth purposes.
Governance reforms would be carried out in these banks, so that they
become more competitive.
A few among them will be encouraged to approach capital market to
raise additional capital.
92.
I wish to inform this august House that robust mechanism is in place
to monitor the health of all Scheduled Commercial Banks and that
depositors’ money is safe.
Further, the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(DICGC) has been permitted to increase Deposit Insurance Coverage for a
depositor, which is now ` one lakh to ` five lakh per depositor.
93.
To strengthen the Cooperative Banks, amendments to the Banking
Regulation Act are proposed for increasing professionalism, enabling access
to capital and improving governance and oversight for sound banking
through the RBI.
94.
The limit for NBFCs to be eligible for debt recovery under the
Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act 2002 is proposed to be reduced from ` 500

26
crore to asset size of ` 100 crore or loan size from existing ` 1 crore to ` 50
lakh.
95.
In the last few years, the government has taken concrete steps to
bring our banking system to be robust. However, there is a need for greater
private capital. Accordingly, it is proposed to sell the balance holding of
Government of India IDBI Bank to private, retail and institutional investors
through the stock exchange.
96.
There is a need to take further steps to bring in transparency and
greater professionalism in Public Sector Banks. The government will take
appropriate measures.
97.
To help easy mobility while in jobs, we wish to infuse into the
Universal Pension coverage with auto enrolment; also, we wish to place
such mechanisms which can enable inter-operability and provide safeguards
for the accumulated corpus.
Regulating role of PFRDAI requires strengthening. Necessary
amendments would be carried out in Pension Fund Regulatory
Development Authority of India Act that will also facilitate separation of
NPS trust for government employees from PFRDAI. This would also enable
establishment of a Pension Trust by the employees other than Government.
I am confident that this will motivate citizens to plan for their old age.
98.
MSMEs are vital to keep the wheels of economy moving. They also
create job, innovate and are risk takers. Several measures for the MSMEs
have been taken in the past few years. There are more steps proposed in
this budget also.
98(1). I propose to make necessary amendments to the Factor Regulation
Act 2011. This will enable NBFCs to extend invoice financing to the MSMEs
through TReDS, thereby enhancing their economic and financial
sustainability.
98(2). Working capital credit remains a major issue for the MSMEs. It is
proposed to introduce a scheme to provide subordinate debt for
entrepreneurs of MSMEs. This subordinate debt to be provided by banks
would count as quasi-equity and would be fully guaranteed through the

27
Credit Guarantee Trust for Medium and Small Entrepreneurs (CGTMSE). The
corpus of the CGTMSE would accordingly be augmented by the
government.
98(3). More than five lakh MSMEs have benefitted from restructuring of
debt permitted by RBI in the last year. The restructuring window was to
end on March 31, 2020. Government has asked RBI to consider extending
this window till March 31, 2021.
98(4). An app-based invoice financing loans product will be launched. This
will obviate the problem of delayed payments and consequential cash flows
mismatches for the MSMEs.
99.
Many mid-size companies are successful domestically but not in
export markets. For selected sectors such as pharmaceuticals, auto
components and others, we propose to extend handholding support – for
technology upgradations, R&D, business strategy etc. A scheme of ` 1000
crore will be anchored by EXIM Bank together with SIDBI. Both these
institutions would contribute ` 50 crore each. This ` 100 crore would be
achieved towards equity and technical assistance. Debt funding of `900
crore from banks would be made available.
Financial Markets
100. Last year, in the budget speech, I had mentioned about deepening
the bond market. To achieve the aspirational growth rate, we would require
flow of capital in our financial system. A lot of work has been done on this in
consultation with the RBI.
Hon’ble Speaker, Sir, I am pleased to inform this House of the
developments:
100 (1). Certain specified categories of Government securities would be
opened fully for non-resident investors, apart from being available to
domestic investors as well.
100 (2). The limit for FPI in corporate bonds, currently at 9% of outstanding
stock, will be increased to 15% of the outstanding stock of corporate bonds.

28
100(3). To improve investors’ confidence and to expand the scope of credit
default swaps, we propose to formulate a legislation, to be placed soon
before the House, for laying down a mechanism for netting of financial
contracts.
101. The Debt-based Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) recently floated by the
government was a big success. Government proposes to expand this by
floating a new Debt-ETF consisting primarily of government securities.
This will give retail investors access to government securities as
much as giving an attractive investment for pension funds and long-term
investors.
102. To address the liquidity constraints of the NBFCs/HFCs, post the
Union budget 2019-20, the government formulated a Partial Credit
Guarantee scheme for the NBFCs. To further this support of providing
liquidity, a mechanism would be devised. Government will offer support by
guaranteeing securities so floated.
Infrastructure Financing
103. Government’s commitment for investment in infrastructure was
reiterated when `103 lakh crore National Infrastructure Pipeline projects
were announced. I would also like to inform that about ` 22,000 crore has
already been provided, as support to Infrastructure Pipeline. This would
cater for equity support to Infrastructure Finance Companies such as IIFCL
and a subsidiary of NIIF. They would leverage it, as permissible, to create
financing pipeline of more than `1,00,000 crore. This would create a major
source of long term debt for infrastructure projects and fulfil a long
awaited requirement.
104. IFSC, GIFT city has the potential to become a centre of international
finance as well as a centre for high end data processing:
104 (1). GIFT IFSC has an approved Free Trade zone for housing vaults. It
already has 19 insurance entities, 40 banking entities. It has also provided
for setting up of precious metals testing laboratories and refining facilities.
With the approval of the regulator, GIFT City would set up an International
Bullion exchange(s) in GIFT-IFSC as an additional option for trade by global

29
market participants. This will enable India to enhance its position
worldwide, create jobs in India and will lead to better price discovery of
gold.
104 (2). In recent years there has been a surge in trading volumes of Indian
rupee in the offshore financial centres. The Government and RBI has taken
various measures to permit Rupee derivatives to be traded in the
International Financial Services Centre at GIFT city, Gujarat.
Disinvestment
105. Listing of companies on stock exchanges discipline a company and
provides access to financial markets and unlocks its value. It also gives
opportunity for retail investors to participate in the wealth so created. The
government now proposes to sell a part of its holding in LIC by way of Initial
Public Offer (IPO).
Fiscal Management
106. XV Finance Commission has given its first report pertaining to
Financial Year 2020-21. In the spirit of co-operative federalism, I am
pleased to announce that we have, in substantial measure, accepted the
recommendations of the Commission. The commission would submit its
final report to the President during the latter part of the year, for five years
beginning 2021-22.
107. It is decided to transfer to the GST Compensation Fund balances due
out of collection of the years 2016-17 and 2017-18, in two instalments.
Hereinafter, transfers to the fund would be limited only to collection by way
of GST compensation cess.
108. A fundamental overhaul of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and
Central Sector Schemes is necessary, to align them with emerging social and
economic needs of tomorrow, and to ensure that scarce public resources
are spent optimally.
109. Recently there has been a debate over transparency and credibility
of the projected fiscal numbers. Let me assure the House that the

30
procedure adopted is compliant with the FRBM Act. This is also consistent
with the practices hitherto followed.
However, for greater clarity, I have enumerated those central
Government debt that are not part of market borrowing and are used to
fund the expenditure at the annexes. Servicing of interest and repayment
of these debts as hitherto, are done out of Consolidated fund of India.
110. Revised Estimates of Expenditure for the Financial Year 2019-20 are
at a level of ` 26.99 lakh Crore and the receipts are estimated at `19.32 lakh
crore.
We have estimated nominal growth of GDP for year 2020-21, on the
basis of trends available, at 10%. Accordingly, receipts for the year 2020-21
are estimated at ` 22.46 lakh cr and, keeping in mind commitment of the
Government towards various schemes and need for improvement in quality
of life, level of expenditure has been kept at ` 30.42 lakh crore.
During the year Government has unfailingly worked towards keeping
up the capital expenditure. Actually, there is substantial enhancement. All
the flagship schemes of the government have been fully provided for.
Details may be seen at the annexes to the printed copy of my speech.
111. Every budget must appropriately address the issue of fiscal deficit.
Recently Government has undertaken very significant tax reforms for
boosting investments. However, expected tax buoyancy will take time.
We estimate a fiscal deficit of 3.8% in RE 2019-20 and 3.5% for
BE 2020-21. This estimation is consistent with Government’s abiding
commitment to macroeconomic stability. It comprises of,
(a) 3.3% for year 2019-20, and 3% for the 2020-21 budget estimate;
(b) Section 4 (2) of the FRBM Act provides for a trigger mechanism for
a deviation from the estimated fiscal deficit on account of structural
reforms in the economy with unanticipated fiscal implications.
Therefore, I have taken a deviation of 0.5%, consistent with Section
4(3) of FRBM Act, both for RE 2019-20 and BE 2020-21.

31
Accordingly, the return path is being laid before the parliament as a
part of Medium Term Fiscal Policy cum Strategy Statement. This fiscal
path commits us to the path of fiscal consolidation without
compromising the needs of investment out of public funds.
Accordingly, net market borrowings for the year 2019-20 would be
` 4.99 lakh crore and for the year 2020-21, it would be ` 5.36 lakh crore.
112. A good part of the borrowings for the financial year 2020-21 would
go towards Capital expenditure of the Government that has been scaled up
by more than 21%. As, I had previously mentioned another about ` 22,000
crore have been allocated for equity to fund certain specified infrastructure
finance companies, who would leverage it manifold and provide much
needed long-term finance to Infrastructure sector. That should spur growth
impulses in the economy.
I would, now, move to Part B of my speech.

32
PART B
Direct Tax
113. Mr Speaker, Sir, our Government has spearheaded radical fiscal
measures to ensure that India’s economy continues to tread the path of
high growth. These are times when countries are competing with each
other like never before to become the most attractive destination for doing
business. Therefore, to make sure that India stays globally competitive and
a favoured destination for investment, we took a bold historic decision of
reducing the corporate tax rate for new companies in the manufacturing
sector to an unprecedented level of 15%. Similarly, for the existing
companies, the rate has also been brought down to just 22%. As a result,
our corporate tax rates are now amongst the lowest in the world. This will
enable companies to expand their businesses and make fresh investments
in the coming future. Though we will have loss of substantial revenue due to
these measures in the short-run, I am certain that our economy will reap
huge returns on this score in due course.
जानामेवभू थसता ोबिलम हीत्।
सह गु णमु टु माद ेिहरसंरिवः॥
Surya, the Sun, collects vapour from little drops of water. So does the King.
They give back copiously. They collect only for people’s wellbeing.
[Verse 18, Sarga 1 Raghuvamsa by Kalidasa]

114. In continuation of the reform measures already taken so far, the tax
proposals in this budget will introduce further reforms to stimulate growth,
simplify tax structure, bring ease of compliance, and reduce litigations.
115.

Personal Income Tax and simplification of taxation

 In the interim Budget of 2019, our government exempted
individuals having income up to ` 5 Lakh from paying any income
tax. Presently, an individual pays 20% on income between ` 5 Lakh
to ` 10 Lakh and 30% on income above ` 10 Lakh.
Further,
currently the Income Tax Act is riddled with various exemptions and
deductions which make compliance by the taxpayer and
administration of the Income Tax Act by the tax authorities a

33
burdensome process. It is almost impossible for a taxpayer to
comply with the Income-tax law without taking help from
professionals.

 In order to provide significant relief to the individual taxpayers and
to simplify the Income-tax law, I propose to bring a new and
simplified personal income tax regime wherein income tax rates will
be significantly reduced for the individual taxpayers who forgo
certain deductions and exemptions.

 Under the new regime, an individual shall be required to pay tax at
the reduced rate of 10% for income between ` 5 Lakh to ` 7. 5
Lakh against the current rate of 20%.

 For income between ` 7.5 Lakh to ` 10 Lakh he will pay at the
reduced rate of 15% against the current rate of 20 %.

 Similarly for the income between ` 10 Lakh to ` 12.5 Lakh the
taxpayer will pay at the reduced rate of 20% against the current rate
of 30 %.

 The income between ` 12.5 Lakh to ` 15 Lakh will be taxed at the
reduced rate of 25% against the existing rate of 30 %. Incomes
above ` 15 lakh will be continued to be taxed at the rate of 30 %.

 Those earning up to ` 5 lakhs shall not pay any tax either in the old
regime or in the new regime.

 The proposed tax structure will provide significant relief to
taxpayers and more so to those in the middle class.
Taxable Income
Slab (`)
0-2.5 Lakh

Existing Tax
Rates
Exempt

New Tax Rates

2.5-5 Lakh

5%

5%

5-7.5 Lakh

20%

10%

7.5-10 Lakh

20%

15%

10-12.5 Lakh

30%

20%

12.5-15 Lakh

30%

25%

Above 15 Lakh

30%

30%

Exempt

34

 In the new tax regime, substantial tax benefit will accrue to a
taxpayer depending upon exemptions and deductions claimed by
him. For example, a person earning ` 15 lakh in a year and not
availing any deductions etc. will pay only `, 1,95,000 as compared
to `, 2,73,000 in the old regime. Thus his tax burden shall be
reduced by 78,000 in the new regime. He would still be the gainer
in the new regime even if he was taking deduction of ` 1.5 Lakh
under various sections of Chapter- VI-A of the Income Tax Act under
the old regime.

 The new tax regime shall be optional for the taxpayers. An individual
who is currently availing more deductions & exemption under the
Income Tax Act may choose to avail them and continue to pay tax in
the old regime.

 The new personal income tax rates will entail estimated revenue
forgone of ` 40,000 crore per year. We have also initiated measures
to prefill the income tax return so that an individual who opts for
the new regime would need no assistance from an expert to file his
return and pay income tax.

 In order to simplify income tax system, I have reviewed all the
exemptions and deductions which got incorporated in the income tax
legislation over the past several decades. It was surprising to know
that currently more than one hundred exemptions and deductions of
different nature are provided in the Income-tax Act. I have removed
around 70 of them in the new simplified regime. We will review
and rationalise the remaining exemptions and deductions in the
coming years with a view to further simplifying the tax system and
lowering the tax rate.
116.

Dividend Distribution Tax

 Currently, companies are required to pay Dividend Distribution Tax
(DDT) on the dividend paid to its shareholders at the rate of 15%
plus applicable surcharge and cess in addition to the tax payable by
the company on its profits.

 It has been argued that the system of levying DDT results in increase
in tax burden for investors and especially those who are liable to

35
pay tax less than the rate of DDT if the dividend income is included
in their income.

 Further, non-availability of credit of DDT to most of the foreign
investors in their home country results in reduction of rate of return
on equity capital for them. In order to increase the attractiveness of
the Indian Equity Market and to provide relief to a large class of
investors, I propose to remove the DDT and adopt the classical
system of dividend taxation under which the companies would not
be required to pay DDT. The dividend shall be taxed only in the
hands of the recipients at their applicable rate.

 Further, in order to remove the cascading effect, I also propose to
allow deduction for the dividend received by holding company from
its subsidiary. The removal of DDT will lead to estimated annual
revenue forgone of ` 25,000 Crore.



117.

This is another bold move which will further make India an
attractive destination for investment.
Concessional tax rate for Electricity generation companies

 In order to give boost to the manufacturing sector, new provisions
were introduced in September 2019 offering a concessional
corporate tax rate of 15% to the newly incorporated domestic
companies in the manufacturing sector which start manufacturing
by 31st March, 2023.

 In order to attract investment in power sector, I propose to extend
the concessional corporate tax rate of 15% to new domestic
companies engaged in the generation of electricity.
118.

Tax concession for foreign investments

 In order to incentivise the investment by the Sovereign Wealth Fund
of foreign governments in the priority sectors, I propose to grant
100% tax exemption to their interest, dividend and capital gains
income in respect of investment made in infrastructure and other

36
notified sectors before 31st March, 2024 and with a minimum lockin period of 3 years.

 In order to make available foreign funds at a lower cost, I propose to
extend the period of concessional withholding rate of 5% under
section 194LC for interest payment to non-residents in respect of
moneys borrowed and bonds issued up to 30th June, 2023.

 I also propose to extend the period up to 30th June, 2023 for lower
rate of withholding of 5% under section 194LD for interest payment
to Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) and Qualified Foreign Investors
(QFIs) in respect of bonds issued by Indian companies and
government securities.

 I further propose to extend the concessional rate of withholding of
5% under section 194LD to the interest payment made on the
Municipal Bonds.

 In order to incentivise listing of bonds at IFSC exchange, I propose to
further reduce the withholding rate from 5% to 4% on interest
payment on the bonds listed on its exchange.
119.

Start-ups
Start-ups have emerged as engines of growth for our economy. Over
the past year, our Government has taken several measures to handhold them and support their growth. During their formative years,
Start-ups generally use Employee Stock Option Plan (ESOP) to
attract and retain highly talented employees. ESOP is a significant
component of compensation for these employees. Currently, ESOPs
are taxable as perquisites at the time of exercise. This leads to cashflow problem for the employees who do not sell the shares
immediately and continue to hold the same for the long-term. In
order to give a boost to the start-up ecosystem, I propose to ease
the burden of taxation on the employees by deferring the tax
payment by five years or till they leave the company or when they
sell their shares, whichever is earliest.

37

 Further, an eligible Start-up having turnover up to 25 crores is
allowed deduction of 100% of its the profits for three consecutive
assessment years out of seven years if the total turnover does not
exceed 25 crore rupees. In order to extend this benefit to larger
start-ups, I propose to increase the turnover limit from existing ` 25
crore to ` 100 crores. Moreover, considering the fact that in the
initial years, a start-up may not have adequate profit to avail this
deduction, I propose to extend the period of eligibility for claim of
deduction from the existing 7 years to 10 years.
120.


121.

Concessional tax rate for Co-operatives
Co-operative societies play an extremely important role in our
economy in facilitating access to credit, procurement of inputs and
marketing of products to their members. These cooperatives are
currently taxed at a rate of 30% with surcharge and cess. As a major
concession and in order to bring parity between the co-operative
societies and corporates, I propose to provide an option to
cooperative societies to be taxed at 22% plus 10% surcharge and 4%
cess with no exemption/deductions. Further, I also propose to
exempt these co-operative societies from Alternative Minimum Tax
(AMT) just like companies under the new tax regime are exempted
from the Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT).
Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME)

 Currently, businesses having turnover of more than one crore
rupees are required to get their books of accounts audited by an
accountant. In order to reduce the compliance burden on small
retailers, traders, shopkeepers who comprise the MSME sector, I
propose to raise by five times the turnover threshold for audit from
the existing ` 1 crore to ` 5 crore. Further, in order to boost less
cash economy, I propose that the increased limit shall apply only to
those businesses which carry out less than 5% of their business
transactions in cash.
122.


Affordable housing
For realisation of the goal of ‘Housing for All’ and affordable
housing, in the last budget I had announced an additional deduction

38
of up to one lakh fifty thousand rupees for interest paid on loans
taken for purchase of an affordable house. The deduction was
allowed on housing loans sanctioned on or before 31st March, 2020.
In order to ensure that more persons avail this benefit and to further
incentivise the affordable housing, I propose to extend the date of
loan sanction for availing this additional deduction by one more
year.


123.

Further, in order to boost the supply of affordable houses in the
country, a tax holiday is provided on the profits earned by
developers of affordable housing project approved by 31st March,
2020. In order to promote the affordable housing projects, I propose
to extend the date of approval of affordable housing projects for
availing this tax holiday by one more year.
Concession to real estate transactions

 Currently, while taxing income from capital gains, business profits
and other sources in respect of transactions in real estate, if the
consideration value is less than circle rate by more than 5 percent,
the difference is counted as income both in the hands of the
purchaser and seller. In order to minimize hardship in real estate
transaction and provide relief to the sector, I propose to increase
the limit of 5% to 10%.
124.

Charity institutions

 Acknowledging the important role played by the charitable
institutions in the society, the income of these institutions is fully
exempt from taxation. Further, donation made to these institutions
is also allowed as deduction in computing the taxable income of the
donor.

 Currently, a taxpayer is required to fill the complete details of the
donee in the income tax return for availing deduction.

 In order to ease the process of claiming deduction for donation, it is
proposed to pre-fill the donee’s information in taxpayer’s return on
the basis of information of donations furnished by the donee. This

39
would result in hassle-free claim of deduction for the donation made
by the taxpayer.

 Further, in order to claim the tax exemption, the charity institutions
have to be registered with the Income Tax Department. In the past,
the process of the registration was completely manual and scattered
all over the country.

 In order to simplify the compliance for the new and existing charity
institutions, I propose to make the process of registration
completely electronic under which a unique registration number
(URN) shall be issued to all new and existing charity institutions.
Further, to facilitate the registration of the new charity institution
which is yet to start their charitable activities, I propose to allow
them provisional registration for three years.
125.

Faceless appeals

Our government is committed to bringing in transformational
changes so that maximum governance is provided with minimum
government. In order to impart greater efficiency, transparency and
accountability to the assessment process, a new faceless assessment
scheme has already been introduced. Currently, most of the functions of
the Income Tax Department starting from the filing of return, processing of
returns, issuance of refunds and assessment are performed in the electronic
mode without any human interface. In order to take the reforms initiated
by the Department to the next level and to eliminate human interface, I
propose to amend the Income Tax Act so as to enable Faceless appeal on
the lines of Faceless assessment.
126.

No Dispute but Trust Scheme – ‘Vivad Se Vishwas’Scheme

 Sir, in the past our Government has taken several measures to
reduce tax litigations. In the last budget, Sabka Vishwas Scheme was
brought in to reduce litigation in indirect taxes. It resulted in settling
over 1,89,000 cases. Currently, there are 4,83,000 direct tax cases
pending in various appellate forums i.e. Commissioner (Appeals),
ITAT, High Court and Supreme Court. This year, I propose to bring a
scheme similar to the indirect tax Sabka Vishwas for reducing
litigations even in the direct taxes.

40

 Under the proposed ‘Vivad Se Vishwas’ scheme, a taxpayer would
be required to pay only the amount of the disputed taxes and will
get complete waiver of interest and penalty provided he pays by 31st
March, 2020. Those who avail this scheme after 31st March, 2020
will have to pay some additional amount. The scheme will remain
open till 30th June, 2020.

 Taxpayers in whose cases appeals are pending at any level can
benefit from this scheme.


127.

I hope that taxpayers will make use of this opportunity to get relief
from vexatious litigation process.
Losses of merged banks

 As a part of consolidation of the financial sector, our Government
has brought out schemes for merger and amalgamation of public
sector banks. In order to ensure that the amalgamated entities are
able to take the benefit of unabsorbed losses and depreciation of
the amalgamating entities, I propose to make necessary
amendments to the provisions of the Income-tax Act.
128.

Taxpayer’s Charter

 Any tax system requires trust between taxpayers and the
administration. This will be possible only when taxpayer’s rights are
clearly enumerated. Towards this end, and with the objective of
enhancing the efficiency of the delivery system of the Income Tax
Department, I propose to amend the provisions of the Income Tax
Act to mandate the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) to adopt a
Taxpayers’ Charter. The details of the contents of the charter shall
be notified soon.
129.


Instant PAN through Aadhaar
In the last Budget, I had introduced the interchangeability of PAN
and Aadhaar for which necessary rules were already notified. In
order to further ease the process of allotment of PAN, soon we will
launch a system under which PAN shall be instantly allotted online
on the basis of Aadhaar without any requirement for filling up of
detailed application form.

41
130. Our Government brought in the GST as a historic reform of the
indirect taxes in 2017. We also took a path-breaking step of simplifying and
rationalising corporate tax in September, 2019. More importantly, we
offered a rate of corporate tax, which perhaps is the lowest in the world.
Continuing on this path, we have now put the personal income tax at its
lowest ever rate and totally removed DDT at the company’s hands. Further,
the direct taxes are now the lowest, simplest, and smoothest. Direct tax on
the Start-ups also has seen many reformatory steps in quick succession.
Even ease of compliance is seeing unprecedented changes. Last but not the
least, personal interface with tax administration is at the minimum ever.
Indirect Tax
131. As I mentioned earlier in Part A of my speech, reforms are
continuing in GST. A simplified return shall be implemented from the 1st
April, 2020. This is under pilot run. It will make return filing simple with
features like SMS based filing for nil return, return pre-filling, improved
input tax credit flow and overall simplification.
132. Refund process has been simplified and has been made fully
automated with no human interface.
133. Electronic invoice is another innovation wherein critical information
shall be captured electronically in a centralized system. It will be
implemented in a phased manner starting from this month itself on optional
basis. It will facilitate compliance and return filing.
134. Several measures have been taken for improving compliance.
Aadhaar based verification of taxpayers is being introduced. This will help in
weeding out dummy or non-existent units. Dynamic QR-code is proposed
for consumer invoices. GST parameters will be captured when payment for
purchases is made through the QR-code. A system of cash reward is
envisaged to incentivise customers to seek invoice. Deep data analytics and
AI tools are being used for crackdown on GST input tax credit, refund, and
other frauds and to identify all those who are trying to game the system.
Invoice and input tax credit matching is being done wherein returns having
mismatch more than 10 percent or above a threshold are identified and
pursued. Significant policy level changes have also been made. GST rate
structure is also being deliberated so as to address issues like inverted duty
structure.

42
135. On Customs side, a number of measures have been taken for ease of
doing business. India’s quantum leap in the Trading Across Border
parameter of Ease of Doing Business rankings by the World Bank is a
testimony to these efforts. India’s rank on this parameter improved from
146 to 80 in 2018 and further to 68 in 2019. Measures have also been
taken for providing a level playing field to our domestic manufacturers,
particularly the MSME sector and for securing borders.
136. It has been observed that imports under Free Trade Agreements
(FTAs) are on the rise. Undue claims of FTA benefits have posed threat to
domestic industry. Such imports require stringent checks. In this context,
suitable provisions are being incorporated in the Customs Act. In the
coming months we shall review Rules of Origin requirements, particularly
for certain sensitive items, so as ensure that FTAs are aligned to the
conscious direction of our policy.
137. We are also strengthening provisions relating to safeguard duties
which are applied when surge in imports causes serious injury to domestic
industry. Amended provisions shall enable regulating such surge in imports
in a systematic way. The provisions for checking dumping of goods and
imports of subsidized goods are also being strengthened for ensuring a level
playing field for domestic industry. These changes are in line with the
international best practices.
138. Exemptions from customs duty have been given in public interest
from time to time. However, a number of these have outlived their utility or
have become outdated. On review, certain such exemptions are being
withdrawn. Remaining custom duty exemptions shall be comprehensively
reviewed by September, 2020 for taking a view on their relevance. I
propose to crowd source suggestions for such reviews. Suggestions would
also be invited in respect of the Customs laws and procedures for aligning
them with the needs of changing times and ease of doing business.
139. Labour intensive sectors in MSME are critical for employment
generation. Cheap and low-quality imports are an impediment to their
growth. Special attention has been taken to put measured restraint on
import of those items which are being produced by our MSMEs with better
quality. Keeping in view the need of this sector, customs duty is being
raised on items like footwear and furniture.
140. Our policy of Make in India has started giving dividends. India is now
making world class goods and exporting such products. We have made
considerable progress in medical equipment too. Till few years back we

43
were dependent on imports for medical equipment. Now, not only we are
manufacturing medical equipment but also exporting them in large
quantities. This sector deserves further fillip. Government has also been
committed to provide health services to all. Ayushman Bharat has made it
possible. To achieve the twin objectives of giving impetus to the domestic
industry and also to generate resource for health services, I propose to
impose a nominal health cess, by way of a duty of customs, on the imports
of medical equipment keeping in view that these goods are now being
made significantly in India. The proceed from this cess shall be used for
creating infrastructure for health services in the aspirational districts.
141. Under Make in India initiative, well laid out customs duty rates were
pre-announced for items like mobile phones, electric vehicles and their
components. This has ensured gradual increase in domestic value addition
capacity in India. Customs duty rates are being revised on electric vehicles,
and parts of mobiles as part of such carefully conceived Phased
Manufacturing Plans.
142. In other changes, customs duty is being reduced on certain inputs
and raw materials while it is being revised upward on certain goods which
are being made domestically. In the previous budget, basic custom duty of
10% was imposed on the news print and lightweight coated paper.
However, since then I have received several references that this levy has
put additional burden on print media at a time when it is going through a
difficult phase. I, therefore, propose to reduce basic customs duty on
imports of news print and light-weight coated paper from 10% to 5%.
143. Chemicals are crucial feed stocks for downstream users. PTA, for
example, is a critical input for textile fibres and yarns. Its easy availability at
competitive prices is desirable to unlock immense potential in textile sector
which is a significant employment generator. Therefore, in the larger
public interest, anti-dumping duty on PTA is being abolished.
144. As a revenue measure, I propose to raise excise duty, by way of
National Calamity Contingent Duty on Cigarettes and other tobacco
products. However, no change is being made in the duty rates of bidis.
145. Finally, continuing the tax reform is an ongoing challenge and we
propose to pursue them with full vigour.
146. Details of my budget proposals relating to direct and indirect taxes
are in the Annexure to my speech.
147. Mr. Speaker Sir, with these words I commend the Budget to this
august House.

44
Annex-I
Budget Outlay for Major Sectors
(` crore)
Sl.
No.

Sector Name

BE 19-20

RE 19-20

BE 20-21

I

Aspirational India

4,67,517

4,36,913

4,82,401

a

Agriculture & Allied, Irrigation &

2,76,380

2,49,910

2,83,202

Rural Development
b

Wellness, Water, Sanitation

93,294

89,618

96,885

c

Education & Skill Development

97,843

97,385

1,02,314

II

Economic Development

2,23,695

2,24,941

2,37,604

a

Industry & Commerce

27,043

28,608

27,227

b

Transport Infrastructure

1,57,437

1,58,207

1,69,637

c

Energy

39,215

38,127

40,740

III

New Economy

40,534

34,724

42,852

a

Information Technology & Space

19,127

18,979

20,379

Technology
b

Communication (Bharat Net)

8,350

3,000

8,000

c

Science & Technology

13,056

12,745

14,473

IV

Caring Society

59,036

54,831

62,626

a

Women & Child Development

50,850

48,210

53,876

and Social welfare
b

Culture & Tourism

5,232

3,963

5,650

c

Environment & Climate Change

2,955

2,658

3,100

V

Financial Sector

19,002

23,686

40,433

a

Banking, Insurance, Financial

19,002

23,686

40,433

Market and Infra Finance

45
Annex – II
Major Scheme Allocation
S.
No.

Name of the Scheme

1

National Social Assistance Progam

9,200

9,200

9,197

2

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Program

60,000

71,002

61,500

3

Umbrella Scheme for Development of
Schedule Castes

5,445

5,568

6,242

4

Umbrella Programme for Development of
Scheduled Tribes

3,810

4,194

4,191

5

Umbrella Programme for Development of
Minorities

1,590

1,709

1,820

6

Umbrella Programme for Development of
Other Vulnerable Groups

1,818

1,846

2,210

7

National Ganga Plan

750

353

800

9

Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna

19,000

14,070

19,500

10

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (PMAY)

25,853

25,328

27,500

11

Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)

10,001

10,001

11,500

12

Swachh Bharat Mission

12,644

9,638

12,294

13

National Health Mission

33,651

34,290

34,115

14

National Education Mission- Samgra
Shiksha
PMJAY-Ayushman Bharat

38,547

37,672

39,161

6,556

3,314

6,429

Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PMKISAN)
Deen Dayal Antyodaya Yojana- National
Livelihood Mission - Ajeevika

75,000

54,370

75,000

9,774

9,774

10,005

18

Pardhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana

4,000

4,733

6,020

19

Umbrella Integrated Child development
Scheme
National Programme of Mid Day Meal in
Schools

27,584

24,955

28,557

11,000

9,912

11,000

15
16
17

20

BE
2019-20

RE
2019-20

(` crore)
BE
2020-21

46
Annex – III
Transfer of Resources to States and Union Territories with Legislature
(` crore)
BE
2019-20
8,09,133
54,581
10,000
392

RE
2019-20
6,56,046
57,344
20,000
380

BE
2020-21
7,84,181
73,275
25,000
407

3. Externally Added Projects - Grants
4. Externally Aided Projects-Loan
5. Schemes of North East Council
6. Schemes under Provision to Article 275(1)
of the Constitution

4,500
19,723
326
2,321

3,000
25,000
324
2,321

4,000
25,000
287
1,199

7. Special Assistance under the demand Transfers to States

15,000

4,000

15,000

8. Special Central Assistance to Scheduled
Castes under Demand- Department of Social
Justice and Empowerment

1,074

1,074

1,172

9. Special Central Assistnace to Tribal Area
under the Demand - Ministry of Tribal Affairs

1,245

1,245

1,210

III. Finance Commission Grants
1. Grant for local bodies - Rural Bodies
2. Grants for Urban Local Bodies
3. Grants-in-Aid for SDRF
4. Post Devolution Revenue Deficit Grants
IV. Total Transfer to States [Other than
(I)+(II)+(III)]

1,20,466
52,558
23,359
10,344
34,206
3,35,220

1,23,710
58,616
25,843
10,938
28,314
3,22,443

1,49,925
69,925
30,000
20,000
30,000
3,35,878

1. Under Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(Revenue)

2,92,003

2,83,057

2,95,269

2. Under Central Sector Schemes (Revenue)
3. Under Other Categories of Expenditure
(Revenue)

42,076
1,033

38,227
1,055

39,451
1,066

4. Capital Transfers
V. Total Transfer to Delhi and Puducherry
1. Under Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(Revenue)

109
10,028
2,026

104
28,419
1,999

93
47,408
5,603

2. Under Central Sector Schemes (Revenue)
3. Under Other Categories of Expenditure
(Revenue)

89
7,613

222
25,972

299
41,355

300
13,29,428

225
11,87,961

150
13,90,666

I. Devolution of States share in taxes
II. Some Important Items of Transfer
1. Assistance to States from NDRF
2. Central Pool of Resources for North
Eastern Region and Sikkim

4. Capital Transfers
Total Transfer to States/UTs

47
Annex – IV
Allocation for Major Ministries/ Departments
Sl.
No.

Ministry/Department

1

Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers' Welfare
Department of Agricultural Research and
Education
Atomic Energy
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH)
Department of Fertilisers
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Department of Commerce
Department for Promotion of Industry and
Internal Trade
Department of Posts
Department of Telecommunications
Department of Consumer Affairs
Department of Food and Public Distribution
Ministry of Culture
Defence Services (Revenue)
Capital Outlay on Defence Services
Defence Pensions
Ministry of Development of North Eastern
Region
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology
Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change
Ministry of External Affairs
Department of Economic Affairs
Department of Financial Services
Department of Revenue
Interest Payments
Pensions
Transfers to States
Department of Fisheries
Department of Animal Husbandry and
Dairying
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Department of Health Research

2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

BE
2019-20

RE
2019-20

(` crore)
BE
2020-21

1,30,485

1,01,904

1,34,400

8,079

7,846

8,363

16,926
1,940

17,426
1,857

18,229
2,122

80,035
4,500
6,219
5,675

80,035
3,700
7,219
6,490

71,345
3,798
6,219
6,606

11,299
27,338
2,272
1,92,240
3,042
2,01,902
1,03,394
1,12,080

12,398
23,350
2,050
1,15,240
2,547
2,05,902
1,10,394
1,17,810

15,525
66,432
2,300
1,22,235
3,150
2,09,319
1,13,734
1,33,825

3,000

2,670

3,049

1,902
6,654

1,810
5,839

2,070
6,899

2,955

2,658

3,100

17,885
14,312
4,690
1,02,048
6,60,471
48,565
1,55,447
805
2,932

17,372
15,952
7,734
1,22,066
6,25,105
50,565
1,55,447
700
2,790

17,347
29,308
11,125
1,36,640
7,08,203
61,169
2,00,447
825
3,289

1,197
62,659
1,900

1,043
62,659
1,950

1,233
65,012
2,100

48
Sl.
No.

Ministry/Department

33
34
35
36
37

Ministry of Home Affairs
Ladakh
Transfers to Jammu and Kashmir
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
Department of School Education and
Literacy
Department of Higher Education
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
Department of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation
Ministry of Labour and Employment
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises
Ministry of Minority Affairs
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
Ministry of Panchayati Raj
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Ministry of Power
Ministry of Railways
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Department of Rural Development
Department of Land Resources
Department of Science and Technology
Department of Biotechnology
Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research
Ministry of Shipping
Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship
Department of Social Justice and
Empowerment
Department of Empowerment of Persons
with Disabilities
Department of Space
Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation
Ministry of Textiles
Ministry of Tourism
Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Ministry of Women and Child Development
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66

BE
2019-20

RE
2019-20

BE
2020-21

4,896
...
...
48,032
56,537

19,955
...
...
42,267
56,537

8,002
5,958
30,757
50,040
59,845

38,317
4,375
8,245

38,317
4,065
7,518

39,467
4,375
8,960

20,016

18,360

21,518

11,184
7,011

11,184
7,011

12,065
7,572

4,700
5,255
871
42,901
15,875
68,019
83,016
1,17,647
2,227
5,580
2,580
4,896

4,700
3,892
500
42,901
15,875
69,967
83,016
1,22,649
1,900
5,481
2,381
4,883

5,029
5,753
901
42,901
15,875
72,216
91,823
1,20,147
2,251
6,302
2,787
5,385

1,903
2,989

1,523
2,531

1,800
3,002

8,885

8,885

10,104

1,205

1,100

1,325

12,473
5,231

13,139
5,231

13,479
5,444

4,831
2,189
6,895
29,165
2,217

4,831
1,416
7,340
26,185
2,777

3,515
2,500
7,411
30,007
2,827

49
Annex-V

Statement of Extra Budgetary & Other Resources (Govt. fully serviced bonds, NSSF etc.)
(` crore)
Part-A – EBRs mobilised through issue of Govt. fully serviced bonds
Demand
No.
42
57
59

61

62

70

77

85
90

Name of the Ministry/Department and Name of
the Scheme
Department of Health & Family Welfare
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) - Urban

BE
2019-20

RE
2019-20

BE
2020-21

5,000.00

2,700.00

3,000.00

20,000.00

10,000.00

10,000.00

5,000.00

1,000.00

3,000.00

--4,882.00

1,850.00
3,033.96

5,000.00

5,000.00
6,300.00

5,000.00
2,000.00

12,000.00

822.00

500.00

1,000.00

9,000.00

8,500.00

5,500.00

---

10,000.00

10,000.00

1,000.00

---

---

57,004.00

44,583.96

49,500.00

BE
2019-20

RE
2019-20

BE
2020-21

---

1,10,000.00

1,36,600.00

----

15,000.00

---

Total

-------

1,805.00
1,310.00
1,28,115.00

----1,36,600.00

Grand Total (A+B)

57,004.00

1,72,698.96

1,86,100.00

Department of Higher Education
Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in
Higher Education (RISE)
Department of Water Resources, River
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
(i) Polavaram Irrigation Project
(ii) Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (AIBP &
other Projects)
Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation
(i) Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural)
(ii) Jal Jeevan Mission/National Rural Drinking
Water Programme
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
Pradhan Mantri-Kisan Urja Sanrakshan Evam
Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM)
Ministry of Power
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti
Yojana/SAUBHAGYA
Department of Rural Development
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) - Rural
Ministry of Shipping
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
Projects
Total

Part-B – Financial support extended through loans from NSSF
Sl.
No.

Name of the Ministry/Department/
Name of the Entity

1

Department of Food & Public Distribution
Food Corporation of India
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs
Building Materials & Technology Promotion
Council(BMTPC)
Department of Fertilizers
(i) Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd.
(ii) Metals & Minerals Trading Corporation

2.

3.

Notes:
(i)
Estimates of financial support through NSSF as indicated in RE 2019-20 & BE 2020-21 is arrived on the basis of gap between
total requirement for funds (including repayment of NSSF loan in FY 2019-20 & FY 2020-21), proposed by Department of Food & Public
Distribution during these years and budgetary provision made in RE 2019-20 & BE 2020-21.
(ii)
Capital Infusion in Public Sector Banks: Capital to the extent of `80,000 crore in 2017-18 and ` 1,06,000 crore in 2018-19 was
infused for Recapitalization of Public Sector Banks to enable them to maintain their Regulatory Capital, Growth Capital and Prompt
Corrective Action (PCA) at desirable levels. For this purpose, a provision of ` 70,000 crore has also been made available in the 2019-20.
Currently, the capital infusion is made through issuance of GoI special Securities carrying a fixed coupon. In the current Financial Year, so
far `64,612 crore has been infused as Government's fresh capital.
(iii)
Statement of liability on annuity projects is given in Part-B of the Receipt Budget 2020-21.

50
Annex to Part B of Budget Speech
Direct Tax Proposals:
1.

Tax Incentives

1.1

Relief in personal income-tax and simplification of taxation: In order
to provide relief and simplify the taxation regime, it is proposed to
provide an option to individual and Hindu undivided family to be
taxed at following lower rates if they do not avail specified
exemption/deductions:
Total Income (Rs)

Rate (%)

Upto 2,50,000

Nil

From 2,50,001 to 5,00,000

5

From 5,00,001 to 7,50,000

10

From 7,50,001 to 10,00,000

15

From 10,00,001 to 12,50,000

20

From 12,50,001 to 15,00,000

25

Above 15,00,000

30

Surcharge and cess shall be continued to be levied at the existing
rates.
1.2

Relief and simplification for co-operative societies: In order to provide
relief and simplify the taxation regime, it is proposed to provide an
option to cooperative societies to be taxed at 22% plus 10% surcharge
plus 4% cess, if they do not avail certain specified
deduction/exemption. Further, it is also proposed to exempt these
cooperative societies from Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT).

1.3

Tax concession for foreign investments: In order to promote
investment of sovereign wealth fund, including the wholly owned
subsidiary of Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA),it is proposed to

51
grant tax exemption to interest, dividend and capital gains income of
Sovereign Wealth Fund and wholly owned subsidiary of the ADIA
subject to fulfilment of certain conditions, in respect of investment
made in the infrastructure sector or other deserving notified sectors
before 31st March, 2024 and with a minimum lock-in period of 3 years.
1.4

Removal of Dividend Distribution Tax: At present dividend is taxed in
the hands of company distributing such dividend. This is found to be
iniquitous. It is proposed to shift to classical system of taxing dividend
in the hands of shareholders.

1.5

Incentives for IFSC, municipal bonds and offshore borrowing: The
concessional rate of Tax Deductible at Source (TDS) at five per cent
currently available under section 194LC and 194LD for borrowing from
overseas is proposed to be extended for three years to 30th June
2023. Further, specified municipal bonds would also be eligible for
such concession on overseas borrowing. It is also proposed to provide
that the withholding tax rate shall be four per cent on fresh overseas
borrowing on or after the 1st day of April, 2020 but before the 1st day
of July, 2023 which is listed only on a recognised stock exchange
located in any IFSC.

1.6

Incentives to Affordable Housing: Currently, an additional deduction
up to one lakh fifty thousand rupees is allowed for interest paid on
loans sanctioned upto 31st March, 2020 for purchase of an affordable
house. In order to incentivise the purchase of affordable housing, it is
proposed to extend the date of sanction of loan to 31st March, 2021.
Hence, this deduction will also be available in respect of housing loans
sanctioned by 31st March, 2021.
Further, in order to boost the supply of affordable houses in the
country, a tax holiday is provided on the profits earned by developers
of affordable housing project approved by 31st March, 2020. In order
to promote the affordable housing projects, it is proposed to extend
the date of approval of affordable housing projects for availing this tax
holiday by one more year. Accordingly, developers of affordable
housing projects approved by 31st March, 2021 can also avail of the
tax holiday.

1.7

Concession to Real Estate sector: Currently, safe harbour of 5% is
allowed for computation of income in respect of transaction of

52
immovable property where the consideration is less than the circle
rate. In order to boost housing sector, it is proposed to increase this
safe harbour to 10%.
1.8

Incentives to start-up: In order to encourage the start-ups to employ
highly talented employees at a relatively low salary by granting them
Employee Stock Option Plan (ESOPs), it is proposed to defer the tax
payment on these ESOPs granted by start-up to their employees by
five years or till the employee leaves the company or when the said
employee sells those shares, whichever is earliest.
Further, in order to extend benefit of tax holiday to larger start-ups, it
is proposed to increase the turnover threshold for claiming tax holiday
from existing Rs. 25 crore to Rs. 100 crores. Further, in order to
address the concerns of start-ups which may not have adequate profit
in initial years for availing this holiday, it is proposed to extend the
period of eligibility for claim of 100% deduction from the existing 7
years to 10 years.

1.9

Allowing carry forward of losses or depreciation in certain
amalgamations: It is proposed to provide that the amalgamated public
sector banks and insurance companies shall be eligible to take the
benefit of unabsorbed losses and depreciation of the amalgamating
entities.

1.10 Widening the definition of “business trust”: In order to encourage
unlisted Infrastructure Investment Trust (InvIT) or a Real Estate
Investment Trust (REIT), it is proposed to extend the same taxation
regime as available to listed InvITs and listed REIT to unlisted REIT and
InvIT.
1.11Exemption to Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited: It is
proposed to provide exemption to Indian Strategic Petroleum
Reserves Limited (ISPRL) in respect of income accruing or arising as a
result of an arrangement for replenishment of crude oil stored in its
storage facility in pursuance to directions of the Central Government
in this behalf subject to the condition of replenishment of crude oil
within three years.

53
1.12 Concessional tax rate for electricity generation companies: In order to
attract investment in the power sector, it is proposed to extend the
concessional corporate tax rate of 15% provided by the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2019 to new domestic companies that are engaged
in the generation of electricity subject to the condition that they start
generating electricity by 31st March, 2023.
2.

Measures to provide tax certainty

2.1

Widening the scope of Safe Harbour Rules and Advance Pricing
Agreement: In order to provide tax certainty to taxpayers in the
matter of attribution of profit to permanent establishment (PE), it is
proposed to widen the scope of Advanced Pricing Agreement (APA)
and Safe Harbour Regime (SHR), by providing that determination of
attribution of profit to PE shall also be in the scope of SHR and APA.

2.2

Rationalisation of deduction to insurance companies: It is proposed to
provide that expenses disallowed in the hands of insurance companies
for late payment of statutory dues shall be allowed in the year of
payment.

2.3 Reduction in rate of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS): In order to reduce
litigation, it is proposed to reduce rate for TDS in case of fees for
technical services (other than professional services) to two per cent
from existing ten per cent in order to align the same with the rate of
TDS on works contract.
2.4

Vivad se Vishwas Scheme: It is proposed to bring out a scheme for
reducing the direct tax litigation. Taxpayers in whose case appeals are
pending at any level can take the benefit from this scheme. Under the
scheme, taxpayer would be required to pay only the amount of the
disputed taxes and there will be complete waiver of interest and
penalty provided they make payment by 31st March, 2020. For
disputed penalty, interest and fee not connected with the disputed
tax, the taxpayer would be required to pay only 25% of the same for
settling the dispute. A tax payer shall be required to pay 110% of the
disputed tax (the excess 10% shall be limited to the amount of related
penalty and interest, if any) and 30% of penalty, interest and fee in
case of payment after 31st March, 2020.

54
3.

WIDENING AND DEEPENING OF TAX BASE

3.1

TDS on E-commerce transactions: In order to widen and deepen the
tax net, it is proposed to provide that e-commerce operator shall
deduct TDS on all payments or credits to e-commerce participants at
the rate of 1% in PAN/Aadhaar cases and 5% in non-PAN/Aadhaar
cases. In order to provide relief to small businessman, it is proposed
to provide exemption to an individual and HUF who receives less than
Rs. 5 lakh and furnishes PAN/Aadhaar.

3.2

Enlarging the scope of TDS on interest: It is proposed to extend the
TDS on interest paid by certain large co-operative societies whose
gross receipts exceeds fifty crore rupees during the last financial year.

3.3

Widening the scope of TCS: It is proposed to provide for tax collection
at source (TCS) on remittance under Liberalised Remittance Scheme
of Reserve Bank of India exceeding seven lakh rupees in a year and on
sale of overseas tour package. Further, TCS is also proposed on sale of
goods in excess of fifty lakh rupee in a year by a seller whose turnover
is more than 10 crore rupees.

3.4

Limit on exemption of Employer’s contribution to certain funds: It is
proposed to put an upper cap of seven lakh and fifty thousand rupees
in a year on tax exempt employer’s contribution in recognized
provident fund, superannuation fund and NPS in the accounts of an
employee.

4.

IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS OF TAX ADMINISTRATION

4.1

Faceless appeal: In order to impart greater efficiency, transparency
and accountability to the assessment process, a new faceless
assessment scheme has already been introduced. In order to ensure
that the reforms initiated by the Income Tax Department to eliminate
human interface from the system reach the next level, it is proposed
to provide enabling power for launching of Faceless appeal on the
lines of Faceless assessment.

4.2

Widening the scope of Dispute Resolution Panel(DRP): It is proposed
to widen the scope of references to DRP by including all non-residents

55
as eligible assessee and to clarify that all variation which are
prejudicial to the assessee shall be within the scope of DRP.
4.3

Taxpayer’s Charter: With the objective of enhancing the efficiency of
the delivery system of the Income Tax Department, it is proposed to
provide that the CBDT shall adopt a Taxpayer’s Charter and issue
necessary direction for the implementation of the Charter.

4.4

Modification in the scope of faceless assessment: It is proposed to
widen the scope of faceless assessment scheme to cover those cases
in which assessment is being completed ex-parte.

5.

EASE OF COMPLIANCE

5.1

Raising of limit for tax audit: In order to help small and medium
enterprises, it is proposed to raise the turnover threshold for
compulsory tax audit from existing Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore in a case
where cash receipt is not more than 5% of total receipt and cash
payment is not more than 5% of total payment. Further, in order to
reduce the compliance cost, it is also proposed to provide that tax
audit report to be filed a month before the due date of filing incometax return. Accordingly, the said due date for filing of income-tax
returns is proposed to be changed from 30th September to 31st
October of the relevant assessment year so that there is no change in
the date of finalisation of tax audit.

5.2

Exempting non-resident from filing of Income-tax return on certain
conditions: In order to reduce compliance burden of non-residents, it
is proposed to exempt them from filing income-tax return on their
income of the nature of royalty or fee for technical services, if tax has
been deducted at the rate given in section 115A.

6.

RATIONALISATION OF PROVISIONS OF THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961

6.1

It is proposed to withdraw the exemption on certain perquisites and
allowances provided to Chairman and members of Union Public
Service Commission and to Chief Election Commissioner and Election
Commissioners.

56
6.2

It is proposed to rationalise the definition of ‘taxable commodities
transactions’ for the purposes of levy of Commodity Transaction Tax.

6.3

It is proposed to enable the Central Government for notifying scheme
for levying penalty in a faceless manner.

6.4

To increase transparency in survey operation, it is proposed to
provide that if the survey is not based on information provided by
prescribed authority, then approval of Commissioner or Principal
Commissioner of Income-tax is required.

6.5

It is proposed to provide that Income Tax Appellate Tribunal can grant
stay of demand only if the taxpayer has either paid twenty per cent of
amount of demand or have provided security for an equal amount.

6.6

It is proposed to reduce the time of stay in India from 182 days to 120
days for an Indian citizen or person of Indian origin to become
resident in India. Consequently, it is proposed to relax the provision of
“resident but not ordinarily resident” so that a resident who has been
non-resident in seven out of ten previous years would be resident but
not ordinarily resident. It is also proposed to provide that an Indian
citizen who is not liable to tax anywhere would be deemed to be
resident in India.

6.7

It is proposed to amend the definition of “work” for the purpose of
TDS under section 194C to provide that in a contract manufacturing,
the raw material provided by the assessee or its associate shall fall
within the purview of the ‘work’ under section 194C.

6.8

To discourage taxpayers to manipulate their books of accounts by
recording false entries including fake invoices to claim wrong input
credit in GST, it is proposed to provide for penalty for these
malpractices.

6.9

It is proposed to amend the provision allowing India to enter into
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAA) with other countries
or territories or association, to align with the new preamble
mandated by Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty
Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting
(commonly referred to as MLI), as India has already ratified MLI.

57
6.10 It is proposed to defer the enactment of Significant Economic
Presence (SEP) to Financial Year 2021-22 as G-20 OECD report on
digital economy is expected by that time. It is also proposed to
provide for source rule for revenue from advertisement targeted to
India customers and revenue from sale of Indian sourced data.
6.11 It is proposed to align exemption from the provision of indirect
transfer to Foreign Portfolio Investors in line with new SEBI FPI
regulations. It is also proposed to rationalise the definition of royalty.
6.12 It is proposed to rationalise the provisions of section 115BAA and
section 115BAB to provide that any domestic company (both existing
as well as new) opting for concessional tax regime will not be allowed
to claim any deduction under Chapter VI-A of the Act except
deductions specifically allowed under said sections.
6.13 The conditions for setting up of offshore fund are proposed to be
rationalised so as to facilitate setting up of fund management activity
in India.
6.14 It is proposed to clarify that in case of a capital asset, being land or
building or both, the fair market value of such an asset on 1st day of
April, 2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty value of such asset as on
1st day of April, 2001, where such stamp duty value is available.
6.15 It is proposed to rationalise the process of registration in the case of
trusts, institutions, funds, university, hospital etc. and approval in the
case of association, university, college, institution or company etc. It is
also proposed to provide filing of statement of donation by donee so
that the deduction claimed by the donor in its tax return can be prefilled.
6.16 It is proposed to rationalise the provision regarding uploading of
Form 26AS so as to include all the prescribed information.
6.17 It is proposed to rationalise the provisions relating to cost of
acquisition and period of holding with respect to segregated portfolios
to provide clarity to taxpayers holding such portfolios.

58
6.18 It is proposed to authorise Board to prescribe person who can verify
the return of income in the cases of a company and a limited liability
partnership. It is also proposed to authorise Board to prescribe person
who can appear as an authorised representatives. This will help
companies under Insolvency proceedings and in liquidation. It is also
proposed to align the due date of Partner and Firm.
6.19 In order to facilitate opting for new concessional tax regime by the
domestic companies, it is proposed to rationalise the provisions of
section 35AD so as to provide an option for claiming deduction under
section 35AD.
6.20 In order to rationalise the provisions of section 94B, it is proposed to
exclude payment of interest to a branch of non-resident bank in India
from interest deductibility rule under section 94B.

59
Annex to Part B of Budget Speech
Indirect Tax Proposals:
A.

Legislative Changes in Customs:
1.

Major Amendments in the Customs Act, 1962:
S.
Amendment
No.
A For improving compliance
1. A new Chapter VAA (a new section 28DA) is being
incorporated in the Customs Act to provide enabling
provision for administering the preferential tariff treatment
regime under Trade Agreements. The proposed new
section seeks to specifically provide for certain obligations
on importer and prescribe for time bound verification from
exporting country in case of doubt. Pending verification
preferential tariff treatment shall be suspended and goods
shall be cleared only on furnishing security equal to
differential duty. In certain cases, the preferential tariff
treatment may be denied without further verification.
B

For reducing litigation

1.

An explanation is being inserted in section 28 to explicitly
clarify that any notice issued under the said section, prior
to the enactment of the Finance Act, 2018, shall continue
to be governed by the section 28 as it existed before the
said enactment, notwithstanding order of any Appellate
Tribunal, Court or any other law to the contrary.

C

Other enabling provisions

1.

Clause (f) of the section 11(2) empowers the Central
Government, for prevention of injury to the economy of
the country by the uncontrolled import or export of gold or
silver, to prohibit their import or export. This clause is
being amended to include “any other goods” (in addition to
gold and silver) in its ambit.
A new section (section 51B) is being incorporated to
provide for creation of an Electronic Duty Credit Ledger in

2.

60
the customs system. This will enable duty credit in lieu of
duty remission to be given in respect of exports or other
such benefit in electronic form for its usage, transfer etc. In
this regard, enabling provisions for issuance of suitable
regulations are also being inserted in section 157(2) of the
Customs Act,1962.
The provisions for recovery of duties provided under
section 28AAA of Customs Act, 1962 are also being
expanded to include such electronic credit of duties.
2.

Amendments to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975:
S.
No.

Amendment

A

Amendment in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975

1.

Section 8B of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, which provided
for imposition of safeguard duty as a trade remedy against
surge in imports of a commodity, is being amended to make
provisions for application of other safeguard measures such
as Tariff Rate Quota and other safeguard measure as the
Central Government may deem necessary to protect the
domestic industry from injury due to significant surge in
imports.

B

Amendment in the First Schedule of the Customs Tariff
Act, 1975

1.

First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 is being
amended to:
(i) Create new tariff item 8414 51 50 for “Wall fans”. The
tariff rate for this item is 20% and BCD on wall fans is
being increased from 7.5% to 20%
(ii) Create new tariff item 8529 90 30 for “Open Cell of
television set”. The tariff rate for this item is 15%.
However, these items will continue at ‘Nil’ BCD.
(iii) Create tariff items 8541 40 11 for “Solar Cells, not
assembled” and tariff item 8541 40 12 for “Solar Cells
assembled in modules or made up into panels”. The
tariff rate for these items is 20%. However, these items
will continue at ‘Nil’ BCD.

61
3.

Amendment in Countervailing Duty Rules and Anti-Dumping Duty
Rules:
These rules provide for manner and procedure for investigation into
cases of imports of subsidized goods and cases of dumping of
goods, respectively, that cause injury to domestic industry.
Following amendments are being made in these rules:
S.
Rules
No.
1
Anti-Dumping
Rules

2

B.

Amendment

Changes are being made in the Rules to
strengthen
the
anti-circumvention
measures by making them more
comprehensive and wider in scope to take
care of all types of circumventions of
antidumping duty in line with best
international practice. Certain other
changes are being made in these Rules for
bringing clarity in the scope of these rules.
Countervailing At present, there is no provision for
investigation in case of circumvention of
Duty Rules
countervailing duties. A provision is being
incorporated in the Countervailing Duty
Rules to enable investigation into case of
circumvention of countervailing duty for
enabling imposition of such duty. Certain
other changes are being made for bringing
clarity in the Rules.

Review of Customs duty exemption for certain imported goods:

1. Customs exemption have been reviewed to weed out such entries
that are redundant, outdated or have outlived their utility. On such
review, 80 exemptions are being withdrawn by making suitable
amendment/rescission of relevant notifications. The exemptions
being pruned on review, inter-alia, include withdrawal of exemption/
concessional rates on the following goods, namely:
S.
Category of
Specific items
No.
goods
1. Agro and animal Tuna bait, skimmed milk and certain milk
based products
products, sugar beet seeds, raw sugar,
certain alcoholic beverages, whey and
isolated soya protein, soya fibre, etc.

62
2.

Items of Metal

a. Lead bars, rods and wire
b. Zinc tubes, pipes and tubes
c. Tin plates, sheets and strips

3.

Machinery

4.

Electronic items

Machinery imported for use in certain
projects such as specified electricity
generation projects, specified Metro
projects,
certain
other
specified
purposes;
Specified goods required for construction
of roads
Copper and articles thereof used in
manufacturing of specified electronic
items;
Parts for manufacture of printers, CD
Writers, MP3 or MP4 or MPEG 4 players,
pre-recorded cassettes, audio cassettes,
colour television tubes, etc.

5.

C.

Miscellaneous

a. Peanut butter, preserved potatoes
b. Instant
print
film,
exposed
cinematographic films
c. A few redundant and outdated
customs duty exemptions are being
withdrawn.
Further,
a
few
exemptions are being re-aligned for
consistency.

Changes in Customs duty for creating a level playing field for MSME
and promoting MAKE IN INDIA:
1. Level playing field for domestic producers:
Customs duty is being increased on the following goods:
Rate of Duty
S.
Category of
Specific items
No.
goods
From To
1. Household goods Tableware
and 10%
20%
and appliances
kitchenware
of
porcelain or china,
ceramic, clay, iron,
steel,
copper
and

63

2.

Electrical
Appliances

3.

Footwear

4.

Furniture goods

5.

Stationery items

6.

Toys

7.

Machinery

aluminium, glassware,
padlocks,
brooms,
hand-sieves,
combs,
vacuum flasks, etc.
Fans,
food
grinders/mixers,
shavers
and
hair
removing appliances,
water
heaters,
hair/hand
drying
apparatus,
ovens,
cookers,
toasters,
coffee/ tea makers,
insect
repellents,
heaters, irons, etc.
a. Footwear
b. Parts of footwear
Seats,
articles
of
bedding
including
mattresses,
lamps,
lighting,
illuminated
signs, and other articles
of furniture
Filing cabinets, paper
trays, binders, clips,
staples,
sign-plates,
name plates, numbers
and symbols etc. made
from base metal
Tricycles,
scooters,
scale models, dolls, etc.
a. Specified goods
used in high voltage
power transmission
project
b. Railway carriage
fans
c. Compressors of
refrigerators and air
conditioners

10%

20%

25%
15%
20%

35%
20%
25%

10%

20%

20%

60%

5%

7.5%

7.5%

10%

10%

12.5%

64

8.

2.

Other
miscellaneous
items

d. Commercial
7.5%
freezers
e. Welding and
7.5%
plasma cutting
machine
f. Rotary
2.5%
tillers/weeder
a. Glass beads
10%
b. Artificial flowers
c. Bells,
gongs,
statuettes, trophies
and like, statuettes,
ornaments,
photograph,
frames, mirrors etc.
of base metal.

15%
10%

7.5%
20%

Changes in Customs duty to promote MAKE IN INDIA under Phased
Manufacturing Programme (PMP) for Electric Vehicles and Cellular
Mobile Phones:
a.
1.
2.

3.

4.

b.
1.
2.

Changes in customs duty under Phased
Rate of Duty
Manufacturing Programme for
From
To
Electric Vehicles
Completely Built Units of Bus and Trucks 25%
40%
(with effect from 01.04.2020)
Semi Knocked Down (SKD) units of bus, 15%
25%
trucks and two wheelers (with effect from
01.04.2020)
Semi Knocked Down (SKD) units of 15%
30%
passenger vehicles and three wheelers
(with effect from 01.04.2020)
Completely Knocked Down (CKD) units of 10%
15%
passenger vehicles, three wheelers, two
wheelers, bus and trucks (with effect from
01.04.2020)
Changes in customs duty under Phased Manufacturing
Programme for Cellular Mobile Phones
PCBA of Mobile phones (with effect from 10%
20%
01.04.2020)
Vibrator/Ringer of Mobile phones (with
Nil
10%
effect from 01.04.2020)

65
Display Panel and Touch Assembly (with
Nil
10%
effect from 01.10.2020)
3. Changes in Customs duty to promote MAKE IN INDIA in Electronics
sector:
3.

S.
Specific Items
No.
1.
Motors like Single Phase AC
motors,
Stepper
motors,
Wiper Motors etc.
2.
Specified chargers and power
adapters
3.
Fingerprint readers for use in
cellular mobile phones
4.
Earphones and headphones

Rate of Duty
From
To
7.5%
10%

Applicable Rate

20%

Nil

15%

Applicable Rate

15%

4. Reduction in Customs duty on raw materials and inputs imported
by Domestic Manufacturers:

S.
No.
1.

2.

Category
of Inputs/
Raw
materials
Fuels,
Chemicals
and
Plastics

Precious
Metals

Specific Items
Very low sulphur fuel oil meeting
ISO 8217:2017 RMG380 Viscosity
in 220-400 CST standards/Marine
Fuel 0.5% (FO)
Calcined Petroleum Coke
Calendared plastic sheets used in
manufacturing of smart cards
Polyester Liquid Crystal Polymers
for use in manufacture of
connectors
Platinum or Palladium used in
manufacture of:
a) Colloidal precious metals,
inorganic
or
organic
compounds of precious metal,
amalgams of precious metals
b) Catalyst with precious metal
or precious metal compounds
as the active substance

Rate of duty
From
To

10%

Nil

10%
10%

7.5%
5%

7.5%

Nil

12.5%

7.5%

66

3.

4.

5.

Spent Catalyst or Ash containing 12.5% 11.85%
precious metal, subject to
specified conditions
Machinery Following parts of Microphone for
10%
Nil
and
use in manufacture of Microphone
Electronic namely,
Goods
a) microphone cartridge
b) microphone holder
c) microphone grill
d) microphone body
Micro-fuse base, sub-miniature 7.5%
Nil
fuse base, Micro-fuse Cover and
sub-miniature fuse cover for use in
manufacture of micro fuse and
sub-miniature fuse.
Willow is being included in the list Applica
Sports
Nil
of items allowed duty free import ble Rate
Goods
up to 3% of FOB value of sports
goods exported in the preceding
financial year
Newsprint a) Newsprint, when imported by
10%
5%
importer
registered
with
Registrar of Newspapers, India.
b) Uncoated paper used for
printing newspaper, when
imported
by
importer
registered with Registrar of
Newspapers, India.
c) Lightweight coated paper used
for printing magazines subject
to actual user condition.

5. Other changes in Customs duty:
S.
No.
1.
2.

Category of
Specific Items
Goods
Food
Walnuts, shelled
processing
Chemicals and Colloidal precious metals,
Plastics
inorganic
or
organic
compounds of precious
metal,
amalgams
of
precious metals
Butyl Acrylate

Rate of Duty
From
To
30%
100%
7.5%

10%

5%

7.5%

67

3.

D

Other prepared binders for
foundry moulds or cores;
Chemical products and
preparations
of
the
chemical
or
allied
industries
Auto and auto Catalytic converter
parts
Noble metal solutions and
noble metal compounds
used in manufacture of
catalytic converter and its
parts
Platinum or Palladium used
in
manufacturing
of
catalytic converter and its
parts
Parts and other specified
inputs for manufacture of
catalytic converters.
Completely Built Units
(CBUs) of commercial
vehicles
(other
than
electric vehicles)
(with
effect
from
01.04.2020)

10%

17.5%

10%
5%

15%
10%

5%

Applicable
Rate

5%

7.5%

30%

40%

Imposition of Health cess on specified medical equipment:

Health Cess at the rate of 5% is proposed to be imposed on the import of
medical devices. This Health Cess shall be a duty of Customs. Health Cess
shall not apply to medical devices which are exempt from BCD. Further,
inputs/parts used in the manufacture of medical devices shall also be
exempt from Health Cess. The proceeds of Health Cess shall be used for
financing the health infrastructure and services.
E.

Revocation of Anti-Dumping Duty on Purified Terephthalic Acid:

Revocation of Anti-dumping duty on import of Purified Terephthalic Acid
originating in or exported from: 1. South Korea and Thailand imposed vide notification No. 28/2019Customs (ADD) dated 24.7.2019
2. China, Iran, Indonesia, Malaysia and Taiwan imposed vide
notification No. 28/2016-Customs (ADD) dated 5.7.2016

68
F. Increase in National Calamity Contingent duty (NCCD) on Cigarettes
and tobacco products:
National Calamity Contingent Duty is levied as a duty of excise on
certain manufactured goods specified under the Seventh Schedule of
Finance Act, 2001. NCCD is being proposed to be increased on tobacco
products (except bidi) as detailed below:
1. On cigarettes, NCCD is being increased ranging from Rs. 200 – 735
per thousand, depending upon length of cigarette and on
filter/non-filter basis.
2. On smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes, NCCD is being
increased from 45% to 60%.
3. On other forms of smoking tobacco (other than smoking mixtures
for pipes and cigarettes) and forms of chewing tobacco, NCCD is
being increased from 10% to 25%.
4. NCCD on Bidis remains unchanged.
G. Proposals involving change in provisions of Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017:

S.
No.
A
1

2

3

4

5

Amendments in the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017 /
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 /
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
For facilitating trade or consumer
Sub section (4) of the section 16 of the CGST Act is being
amended to delink the date of issuance of debit note from
the date of issuance of the underlying invoice for purposes of
availing input tax credit.
Clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 29 of the CGST Act is
being amended to provide for cancellation of registration
which has been obtained voluntarily under sub-section (3) of
section 25.
A proviso to sub-section 1 of section 30 of the CGST Act is
being inserted to empower the jurisdictional tax authorities
to extend the date for application of revocation of
cancellation of registration in deserving cases.
Section 51 of the CGST Act is being amended to remove the
requirement of issuance of TDS certificate by the deductor;
and to omit the corresponding provision of late fees for delay
in issuance of TDS certificate.
Section 168 of the CGST Act is being amended to make
provisions for enabling the jurisdictional commissioner to

69

B
1.

2.

3.

C
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

exercise powers under sub-section (5) of section 66 and
second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 143.
For improving compliance
Section 10 of the CGST Act is being amended, so as to exclude
from the ambit of the Composition scheme certain categories
of taxable persons, engaged in making(i) supply of services not leviable to tax under the CGST Act, or
(ii) inter-State outward supply of services, or
(iii) outward supply of services through an e-Commerce
operator.
Section 122 of the CGST Act is being amended by inserting a
new sub-section to make the beneficiary of the transactions
of passing on or availing fraudulent Input Tax Credit liable for
penalty similar to the penalty leviable on the person who
commits such specified offences.
Section 132 of the CGST Act is being amended to make the
offence of fraudulent availment of input tax credit without an
invoice or bill a cognizable and non-bailable offence; and to
make any person who commits, or causes the commission
and retains the benefit of transactions arising out of specified
offences liable for punishment.
Other changes
The definition of “Union territory” in clause (114) of section 2
of the CGST Act is being amended to update the definition of
Union territory in view of the bringing into force of the
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Act, 2019 and the Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union
Territories), Act, 2019.
Consequential changes are also being made in UTGST Act,
2017.
Section 31 of the CGST Act is being amended to provide
enabling provision to prescribe the manner of issuance of
invoices in case of supply of taxable services.
Section 109 of the CGST Act is being amended to bring the
provision for Appellate Tribunal under the CGST Act in the
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh.
Section 140 of the CGST Act is being amended with effect
from 01.07.17, to prescribe the manner and time limit for
taking transitional credit.
Section 172 of the CGST Act is being amended to make
provision for enabling issuance of removal of difficulties order

70

6.

for another 2 years, i.e. till five years from the date of
commencement of the said Act.
Similar changes are also being made in the IGST Act, 2017
(section 25), the UTGST Act, 2017 (section 26) and the GST
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (section 14).
Entries at 4(a) & 4(b) in Schedule II of the CGST Act is being
amended with effect from 01.07.2017 to make provision for
omission of supplies relating to transfer of business assets
made without any consideration from Schedule II of the said
Act.

The proposed changes in GST laws will come into effect from the date
when the same will be notified, as far as possible, concurrently with the
corresponding amendments to the similar Acts passed by the States &
Union territories with legislature.
H.

Retrospective amendments to give effect to the recommendations
of the GST Council:
S.
No.
1

2

3

Retrospective amendment in the Goods and Service Tax rate
and refund provisions
Exemption from Central Tax, Union Territory Tax and
Integrated Tax is being given on fishmeal [HS 2301], for the
period 01.07.2017 to 30.09.2019. However, GST paid on
supply of fishmeal during the period shall not be refunded.
Concessional 12% rate of Integrated Tax and 6% Central Tax
and 6% Union Territory Tax during the period 01.07.2017 to
31.12.2018, on pulley, wheels and other parts (falling under
heading 8483) and used as parts of agricultural machinery of
headings 8432, 8433, and 8436. However, GST paid at any
other rate (higher than 12%) shall not be refunded.
The refund of accumulated credit of compensation cess on
tobacco products arising out of inverted duty structure in
Compensation Cess has been disallowed with effect from
1.10.2019 vide notification No. 3/2019- Compensation Cess
(Rate) dated 30.9.2019. This notification is being given
retrospective effect from 1.7.2017 onwards. Accordingly, no
refund on account of inverted duty structure shall be
admissible on tobacco products for any period.

For further details of the budget proposals, the Explanatory Memorandum
and other relevant budget documents may be referred to.

